================================================================================
EMAIL RELATIONSHIP: jeevacation@gmail.com ↔ larry summers
Total Emails: 46
  jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers: 21 emails
  larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com: 25 emails
================================================================================


================================================================================
EMAIL #1
================================================================================
Date: 2/11/2013 5:45:09 PM
Subject: prep for dinner, israel pres briefing /
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Wall Street Journal 
The Ayatollah Always Says No  
Editorial 
February 8, 2013 --The Farsi word for "no" is na h, which is easy enough 
to remember. Maybe even Joe Biden won't forget it the next time the U.S. 
tries to reach out diplomatically to Iran. 
We're speaking of the Administration's latest effort to come to terms with 
Tehran over its nuclear programs, which Mr. Biden made last weekend at 
the Munich Security Conference. The U.S. offer of direct bilateral talks, 
he said, "stands, but it must be real and tangible." Iranian foreign minister 
Ali Akbar Salehi, who was also at the conference though he refused to 
meet with U.S. officials, called Mr. Biden's comments "a step forward." 
Mr. Salehi's remark set the usual hearts aflutter that Iran is finally serious 
about a deal. But the optimism was brief On Thursday, Iran's Supreme 
Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei flatly rejected direct talks with the U.S. 
"The U.S. is pointing a gun at Iran and wants us to talk to them," he said. 
"Direct talks will not solve any problems." 
This isn't the first time Mr. Khamenei has played chaste Daphne to 
President Obama's infatuated Apollo. Just after becoming President in 
2009, Mr. Obama sent the Ayatollah two private letters and delivered a 
conciliatory speech for the Persian new year of Nowruz. Mr. Khamenei's 
answer: "They chant the slogan of change but no change is seen in 
practice." He told a crowd chanting "death to America" that "if a hand is 
stretched covered with a velvet glove but it is cast iron inside, that makes 
no sense." 
That was in March 2009. In October of that year the U.S. and its allies 
tentatively worked out a deal with Iranian negotiators to move some of 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027102 
their enriched uranium outside Iran. Western analysts were confident that 
Mr. Khamenei would give his blessing, given the international pressure he 
was said to be under following the fraudulent elections and the bloody 
crackdown that followed. 
The Ayatollah quashed that deal too: "Whenever they [Americans] smile 
at the officials of the Islamic revolution, when we carefully look at the 
situation, we notice that they are hiding a dagger behind their back." 
It was the same in January 2011, when diplomacy also collapsed. Ditto in 
2012, when negotiations in February, May and June each ended in failure. 
Washington went into those talks thinking they were going to succeed on 
the theory that Tehran desperately wants relief from the supposedly 
crippling pressure of economic sanctions. 
Why does the Ayatollah keep saying no? The conventional wisdom is that 
previous U.S. offers weren't generous enough, or that the wrong President 
was in the White House, or that Iran wants only to deal directly with the 
U.S. and not in multilateral forums. Each of these theories has been tested 
and shown to be false. 
A more persuasive explanation—get ready for this shocker—is that Iran 
really wants a bomb. The regime believes, not unreasonably, that 
Moammar Gadhafi would still be in power had he not given up his nuclear 
program in 2003. Mr. Khamenei also fears a "velvet revolution" scenario, 
in which more normal ties with the West threaten the ideological 
foundations of the Islamic Republic. Confrontation with America is in this 
regime's DNA. 
Meantime, the pretense of negotiations has allowed Tehran to play for 
time to advance its programs. When Mr. Obama took office, Iran had 
enriched 1,000 kilos of reactor-grade uranium. In its last report from 
November, U.N. inspectors found that Iran has produced 7,611 kilos to 
reactor grade, along with 232 kilos of uranium enriched to 20%, which is 
close to bomb-grade. Last month, Iran declared that it would install 3,000 
advanced centrifuges at its Natanz facility, which can enrich uranium at 
two to three times its current rate. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027103 
As for the sanctions, they may hurt ordinary Iranians but this regime is 
famously indifferent to the suffering of its own people. The Ayatollah also 
doesn't seem to take the Administration's talk about "all options being on 
the table" seriously. Mr. Obama's nomination of Iran dove Chuck Hagel to 
be Secretary of Defense reinforces that impression, as do reports that the 
White House blocked Pentagon and CIA plans to arm the opposition that's 
fighting to overthrow Iran's client regime in Damascus. An America that 
won't help proxies in a proxy war isn't likely to take the fight directly to 
Iran's nuclear facilities. 
In rejecting Mr. Biden's offer, the Ayatollah said frankly, "I'm not a 
diplomat; I'm a revolutionary." Another round of multilateral talks with 
Iran is set to resume this month, but maybe Joe Biden and his boss should 
start taking no for an answer. 
Article 2. 
Foreign Policy 
Let's face it: Obama's Iran policy is failing  
James Traub 
February 8, 2013 -- There is no better example of an Obama 
administration initiative that has succeeded on its own terms, and yet 
failed as policy, than Iran. By engaging the regime in Tehran, and being 
rebuffed, the White House has been able to enlist China, Russia, and the 
European Union in imposing tough sanctions on Iran. By steadily 
ratcheting up those sanctions, the administration has been able to 
gradually squeeze the Iranian economy. By insisting that "containment" is 
not an option, Obama has persuaded Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu that he need not launch an attack on Iran's nuclear facilities --
at least not any time soon. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027104 
Obama has done everything right, and yet his Iran policy is failing. There 
is no evidence that the sanctions will bring Iran to its knees and force the 
supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to accept the humiliation of 
abandoning his nuclear program. But neither is there any sign of new 
thinking in the White House. "I don't see how what didn't work last year is 
going to work this year," says Vali Nasr, who served in the Obama State 
Department before becoming dean of the Johns Hopkins School of 
Advanced International Studies. He might not get much of an argument 
from White House officials, who, the New York Times recently noted, 
"seem content with stalemate." 
The United States is not negotiating directly with Iran but rather doing so 
through the P5+1, which consists of the five permanent Security Council 
members and Germany. The P5+1's current position is that Iran must stop 
enriching nuclear fuel to 20 percent purity -- a point from which Iran 
could quickly move to weapons-grade material -- transfer its existing stock 
of such fuel to a third country, and shut down one of its two enrichment 
facilities, known as Fordow. In exchange, the parties will help Iran 
produce such fuel for medical purposes, which the regime claims is its 
actual goal. Iran has refused, saying it will not shut down Fordow. 
But the current state of play masks the larger issue, which is that the 
ayatollah and those around him believe the United States wants to make 
Iran cry uncle -- which happens to be true. The next round of P5+1 
negotiations, now scheduled for Feb. 25 in Kazakhstan, are almost 
certainly not going to go anywhere unless the United States signals that it 
is prepared to make what the Iranians view as meaningful and equivalent 
moves in exchange for Iranian concessions. Arms-control experts say that 
both British Prime Minister David Cameron and Catherine Ashton, head 
of foreign affairs for the European Union, favor offering Iran a reduction 
in sanctions; but there's a limit to what they can do without the United 
States. 
Of course, such flexibility would be pointless if Iran is simply hell-bent on 
gaining the capacity to produce a nuclear weapon. The signals, as always 
with Iran, are cryptic. Iranian authorities have told nuclear inspectors that 
they plan to install a new generation of centrifuges in order to accelerate 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027105 
enrichment. And yet Iran also chose to convert some of its stockpile of 
highly enriched uranium for medical use rather than approach the amount 
needed for a bomb, leading Israeli authorities to predict that Iran wouldn't 
be able to build a bomb before 2015 or 2016. Last week, Ali Akbar 
Velayati, Khamenei's foreign policy advisor, publicly criticized officials 
who have treated the negotiations dismissively. Presumably, he was 
thinking of President Mahmoud Ahmadinej ad, who has compared Iran's 
nuclear program to a train without brakes. 
Iran is now at the outset of what promises to be a raucous presidential 
election, and may be no more capable of serious negotiations between now 
and June than the United States was in 2012. But what is clear is that the 
sanctions have moderated Iranian behavior and rhetoric. At the same time, 
as the Times also noted, the economic pressure is not nearly great enough 
to compel concessions that the regime would view as a blow to national 
pride. In short, Iran might -- might -- be more willing to accept a face-
saving compromise than they were a year or two ago, but will need serious 
inducements to do so. 
What would that entail? Virtually all the proposals that have come from 
outside experts suggest that the P5+1 begin with modest confidence-
building measures, especially in the period before the election. A recent 
report by the Arms Control Association enumerates several of them. 
Western diplomats, for example, could take up Ali Akbar Salehi, Iran's 
foreign minister, on his proposal to limit the "extent" of enrichment -- i.e., 
well below 20 percent -- in exchange for fuel rods for the research reaction 
and a recognition of Iran's "right to enrich," a notional concept the United 
States already supports under specified conditions. Or Iran could suspend 
20-percent enrichment in exchange for a suspension of new sanctions. But 
Iran is unlikely to accept even such small steps unless it felt that additional 
moves would win additional explicit concessions. 
Beyond that, the outlines of what in Middle East peacemaking is known as 
"final status" are clear enough: Iran agrees to verifiable inspections to 
ensure that it does not enrich uranium beyond 3.5 percent and does not 
pursue a nuclear weapons program, while the West accepts Iran's "right to 
enrich" and dismantles sanctions. Of course, the outlines of a Middle East 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027106 
peace deal are clear enough, too. But in both cases, neither side trusts the 
other, and each demands that the other go first. Instead, nobody goes 
anywhere. 
U.S. officials have very good reason to be wary of Iran's bona fides. In 
2009, they reached a deal with Iranian negotiators to send the stockpile of 
highly enriched uranium out of the country -- only to see the ayatollah 
repudiate it. As Ray Takeyh, an Iran expert with the Council on Foreign 
Relations puts it, "Khamenei has created a politics where it's hard for him 
to compromise." But so has the United States. Anyone who watched 
Chuck Hagel's confirmation hearing knows that it is an article of faith in 
Congress -- and pretty much a bipartisan one -- that Iran is a faithless, 
illegitimate terrorist state that will be deterred from building a bomb only 
by the threat of massive attack. Had Hagel been foolish enough to suggest 
that the United States offer to reduce sanctions in exchange for Iranian 
concessions, the White House would have had to find a new candidate for 
defense secretary. 
It's the U.S. Congress that arguably holds the high cards, though the White 
House put them in its hands. The most potent sanctions are legislated, and 
have been written in such a way that they will be very hard to unwind. 
Obama can waive them for up to six months. But the ayatollah is not about 
to make irreversible decisions in exchange for six months of relief. 
The White House is thus stuck between Tehran and Capitol Hill. And it 
can't live long with the current stalemate. After all, Obama has said that 
"containment" is not an option. He is hoping that the combination of 
economic pain and fear of military action will bring Tehran to its senses. If 
it doesn't, the president has said that he is prepared to use force. Perhaps 
he feels that just as spurned engagement served as the predicate for tough 
sanctions, so would failed negotiations lay the predicate for a broadly 
supported strike against Iran's nuclear facilities. Iran left us no choice, he 
might say, as the bombers fly. 
That would constitute a diplomatic triumph ... if a strike against Iran's 
nuclear facilities is a good idea. If in fact it's a dreadful prospect -- worse, 
perhaps, even than containment -- then it would constitute a failure that 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027107 
would obliterate the record of adroit diplomacy of the last four years. 
Obama understands very well -- even if many members of Congress do 
not -- that even our worst adversaries have interests of their own, that 
those interests feel as legitimate to them as ours do to us, and that we at 
least have a chance of settling disputes with them if we can find the place 
where our interests overlap. The time has come for him to apply that 
wisdom to Iran. 
James Traub is a fellow of the Center on International Cooperation. 
Article 3. 
The National  
An uneasy courtship as Iran and Egypt test 
the waters  
Alan Philps 
Feb 8, 2013 -- There is a consensus among commentators that the visit of 
the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, to Egypt - complete with 
red carpet and kiss on both cheeks from President Mohammed Morsi - 
does not amount to a breakthrough. The view of US think-tanks is that it 
does not amount to very much at all, and certainly not worth getting 
anxious about. Such a consensus is always dangerous, and it is worth 
looking more closely at what it is based on. 
Mr Ahmadinejad is the first Iranian leader to set foot in Cairo since the 
deposed Shah of Iran was given refuge in Cairo, where he died and 
received a state funeral. The two countries have not had diplomatic 
relations since 1979. 
The Iranian president's visit has deep historical significance, even if he 
came as a guest of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference summit. 
The picture of the two presidents embracing says to the world: Egypt is 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027108 
released from the US straitjacket and is free to resume its position as a 
regional power. 
There are plenty of reasons, however, to dismiss the visit as just show. Mr 
Ahmadinejad is a lame duck, banned by the constitution from running for 
a third term in the June elections. As Iran moves into a period of war 
economy under the pressure of sanctions designed to curb its nuclear 
programme, Mr Ahmadinejad is engaged in a furious struggle to ensure 
that his rival, the parliamentary speaker, Ali Larijani, does not succeed 
him. The corruption allegations levelled by Mr Ahmadinejad against the 
Larijani family are deeply damaging to the Iranian regime. 
Mr Morsi, meanwhile, has little to show Egyptians that he has improved 
their lot. Cairo is the scene of near-constant street battles and the economy 
is tanking. Egypt's currency reserves have just sunk to $13.6 billion (Dh50 
billion), below the critical level needed to cover three months of imports. 
The country is staring bankruptcy in the face, but cannot access 
emergency funds from the International Monetary Fund without 
implementing unpopular reforms that would further raise social tensions. 
Both leaders need to show that they have "friends" abroad. The reality is a 
little different. Egypt and Iran appear to be divided by the Syria conflict, 
which is symptomatic of the wider split between the Sunni Muslim 
powers, led by Saudi Arabia, and Iran's faltering "axis of resistance" that, 
with Syria in play and Hamas having defected, now looks increasingly like 
a Shia Muslim axis. 
If we look more closely, then the story of Egypt resuming its role as a 
regional power looks premature. At this stage, Egypt is trying to find some 
space to manoeuvre between Saudi Arabia and Iran. Given that Saudi 
Arabia has the money that Egypt needs, and Washington has a lock on the 
actions of the IMF, that space is limited. 
But what does Washington think? Not very much at the moment. With 
President Barack Obama's second term team still being assembled, it is not 
surprising that there is something of a vacuum in Middle East policy. But 
the issue is deeper than that. The Obama administration has declared it 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027109 
wants to focus on the Asia-Pacific region and, surprisingly, it means what 
it says. 
Only a year after troops withdrew from Iraq, that country is not talked 
about in Washington, like an embarrassing relative. In North Africa, the 
US military has taken a back seat while the work of toppling Colonel 
Muammar Qaddafi and driving back the jihadists in Mali has been left to 
Franco-British forces. Syrian policy is one of drift, where the 
administration finds all options unpalatable. In Egypt, Washington has set 
a red line for the Muslim Brotherhood leadership: it must adhere to the 
peace treaty with Israel. Everything else is negotiable. 
This week the Pentagon revealed that it would no longer be stationing two 
aircraft carriers in the Gulf region, as it has done for most of the past two 
years, due to cuts in the defence budget, and the possibility of even more 
stringent ones if Congress fails to agree on raising the US debt ceiling. 
The Iranian nuclear programme remains a priority in Washington, but the 
carrier decision indicates a less warlike stance. One cannot say that US 
power is ebbing, but there is a clear lack of political will in Washington 
for decisive action in the Middle East. For now, the logic is that regional 
powers will have to take more responsibility. Egypt, although impotent at 
the moment, will have to find its role. The US needs to talk to Iran if there 
is ever going to be a compromise on its nuclear programme. Maybe Egypt 
could help. 
Both Egypt and Iran have denied a report that General Qassem Suleimani, 
commander of the Quds force, a division of the Iranian Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps, and the man responsible for Iran's military 
operations in Syria, visited Cairo in January. There was no reaction in 
Washington to this report. 
If there is going to be a resolution of the Syrian crisis without a decade of 
Lebanon-style war, then allies of the US will have to speak to someone of 
the calibre of Gen Suleimani, a far more important figure than Mr 
Ahmadinejad. Could this lead to a historic compromise between the 
Muslim Brotherhood and the ayatollahs to create a new Islamic front 
spreading revolution? 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027110 
That is out of the question. Egypt is too reliant on foreign finance, which 
Iran cannot offer at the moment, for it to swing into Tehran's orbit. And 
there is far too much domestic opposition. 
What is clear is that while the US is reluctant to take direct responsibility, 
other countries must find ways of resolving the regional contradictions 
that have become unmanageable in the era of American tutelage. That will 
lead to some unlikely meetings taking place. The Morsi-Ahmadinejad 
embrace may not be a breakthrough, but it does show one thing: what was 
unthinkable a few years ago may one day be the norm. 
Article 4. 
Al-Monitor 
llamas Weighs Options For Recognizing Israel 
Adnan Abu Amer 
February 8 -- Recently, a lot has been said — and a lot of denials have 
been issued — about Hamas recognizing a two-state solution. It appears 
that Hamas is still vacillating between explicitly and implicitly 
recognizing Israel. Hamas realizes that recognizing Israel would open up 
the world's doors to the movement. At the same time, Hamas knows that 
such a move would be seen as a betrayal by the movement's supporters, 
both inside and outside Palestine. As Hamas well knows, its legitimacy 
derives from its vocal support for armed struggle within the complicated 
Palestinian reality. Hamas also knows that it will pay a heavy price if it is 
seen to be agreeing to international conditions. The cost will not only be 
political, but also ideological. Hamas has spent many years talking and 
writing about its notion of the state, its identity, borders, concept, 
constitution and the role of Islam within it. Generations of Hamas 
members were raised on those ideas. But those ideas have remained part 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027111 
of the imagination and heritage, and of the nostalgic dream of restoring the 
Islamic caliphate. 
The concept of the state 
Today's debate within Hamas over the concept of the state is more 
concrete than theoretical. The political conditions in the Palestinian 
territories do not allow for dreaming about unrealistic grand theories being 
promoted by some Islamist movements. Hamas is facing real-world 
problems that require real-world solutions. The Palestinian state being 
envisioned by Palestinian, Arab, and world politicians is based on the June 
1967 borders. But does that fit Hamas's political vision and intellectual 
orientation? Generations of Islamists have been raised on the concept of 
the "Islamic state," which is synonymous with the Islamic caliphate. But 
Hamas's situation is a little different. Israel's occupation of all Palestinian 
territories is a political and concrete obstacle to the dream of an Islamic 
state and it forces the consideration of more realistic options. So we have 
started hearing, from Hamas, statements about establishing a Palestinian 
state on the June 1967 borders. There is no doubt that this development is 
an intellectual and political shift by Hamas. More than 20 years ago, 
Hamas founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin proposed a long truce with Israel. 
But today, such a proposal is more realistic and is attributed to Hamas's 
current leader Khaled Meshaal. Hamas in 2013 is different than Hamas in 
1993. Hamas is now an influential player and its statements and stances 
are taken into account by regional and international decision-making 
circles. 
Recognition and commitment 
The shuttle diplomacy by Western officials between Gaza, where Hamas's 
domestic leadership is located, and the Arab capitals of Doha, Cairo and 
Amman have only one objective: getting Hamas to agree to the conditions 
that would allow it to be embraced by the international community. In 
other words, they want Hamas to agree to the two-state solution. And that, 
explicitly or implicitly, essentially means that Hamas has recognized 
Israel's right to exist! Those who have been following Hamas's course 
since it was founded 25 years ago notice that every once in awhile there is 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027112 
international pressure to make Hamas agree to those conditions. But 
Hamas is afraid to fall into the same trap that others, like Fatah, have 
fallen into without getting anything in return except loss of popular 
support, as was demonstrated in the elections seven years ago. In light of 
the demands that the movement should recognize the two-state solution 
and make political commitments, some influential circles within the 
Hamas leadership think that the movement is being drawn into going 
beyond its rational political discourse and how it deals with the reality on 
the ground, and into recognizing Israel and exchanging messages with 
it. However, the siege has made the Palestinian territories miserable. So 
decision-makers in Hamas are forced to issue hints and signals that do not 
affect the movement's general principles. Those signals, however, may be 
misunderstood. And this is where the problem lies. No one thinks that 
Hamas supporters will make a big deal of those signals, but any concrete 
steps toward recognizing Israel will cost Hamas dearly, something which I 
don't think Hamas wants during this dangerous phase. At the external 
level, Hamas's enemies and opponents may think that the siege has finally 
paid off, albeit a little late, and that Hamas's current declarations are 
signals that, if the siege and the Palestinian suffering continue, the 
movement may explicitly recognize Israel, which would open the 
"appetite" of Hamas' opponents for more breakthroughs in its ideology 
and principles. 
Not an existential conflict, but a border dispute. 
Although Hamas is aware of all that, it should be noted that in a few 
months it is facing elections during which the movement's signals that it 
may accept a two-state solution will be used in a fierce anti-Hamas 
campaign. Even though the movement has provided a different 
administrative performance than before, the fundamental change in the 
movement's political program may be a decisive factor for the Palestinian 
voters. As Hamas is being smothered, with a few breaches here and there, 
the demands that it should recognize Israel are ongoing and without letup. 
In other words, Hamas must choose between recognizing Israel to stay in 
power, or losing what it has achieved democratically as punishment for 
having to refused to bow to the world's conditions. In reality, the 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027113 
international community has not significantly changed its relationship with 
the Palestinians, including Hamas, over the past months and years. There 
has only been some cosmetic and tactical changes. Washington, the 
European Union and the UN have not only signaled to Hamas that it 
should join the "broken and paralyzed" peace process, they have also 
insisted that the Palestinians explicitly recognize Israel. But this time, 
those powers are armed with an "Islamic religious cloak," which would 
make a recognition of Israel more meaningful, especially since Hamas 
considers its conflict with Israel to be an ideological "existential conflict, 
not a border dispute." That pressure is accompanied with a financial and 
economic blockade, which is increasing the pressure on Hamas, especially 
since those carrying out the blockade are blocking anything that would 
alleviate Palestinian suffering. It is clear that they want to punish the 
Palestinians for electing Hamas and warn them against reelecting them; 
that is if the reconciliation succeeds and the elections happen on time. It 
should be noted that certain Israeli and Western research institutions have 
estimated the timeframe that Hamas will need to explicitly recognize 
Israel. They may accept from Hamas certain rhetorical signals for a while 
before the movement officially recognizes Israel. Since Hamas was 
founded in late 1987, it has been conducting an ideological and political 
campaign for its members and supporters against recognizing Israel. 
Hamas' constitution says that Israel is a "cancer that must be eradicated," 
and that "its demise is a Quranic inevitability." Those and other slogans 
have been a key component of Hamas's political discourse. It is therefore 
not easy for Hamas to change overnight due to political realism and 
suddenly tell its supporters: We shall recognize Israel, but it's under 
duress! 
Adnan Abu Amer is Dean of the Faculty of Arts, and a lecturer in the 
history of the Palestinian issue, national security, political science and 
Islamic civilization at Al Ummah University Open Education. 
Article 6. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027114 
NYT 
An Assassination in Tunisia  
Editorial 
February 8, 2013 -- Tunisia is where the Arab Spring began just over two 
years ago. Until now it has set an encouraging example of progress toward 
democracy and pluralism. Free elections brought to power a coalition 
government pledged to pragmatic cooperation between a moderate-led 
Islamist party, Ennanda, and smaller, secular coalition partners. 
Progress has not always been smooth. But just as Tunisians inspired 
people in neighboring countries like Egypt and Libya to rise up against 
their corrupt and repressive dictators, they also seemed, for many, to point 
the way toward a democratic future accommodating both religious beliefs 
and the rights of the secular under the rule of law. 
Those hopes have been severely shaken by the murder on Wednesday of 
Chokri Belaid. Mr. Belaid, a human- rights activist and one of Ennanda's 
most outspoken critics, had publicly challenged the party's failure to 
investigate or prosecute violent acts of intimidation carried out by 
shadowy gangs of religious extremists. Mr. Belaid's killers have not yet 
been identified. But suspicion now falls on those same extremist groups, 
which had issued public threats against Mr. Belaid and other prominent 
secular leaders — without any serious government response. 
Thousands gathered for Mr. Belaid's funeral on Friday amid a nationwide 
general strike called by his trade union supporters. Tensions are high. 
What is urgently needed is a credible, independent investigation of Mr. 
Belaid's murder, followed by prosecution of the killers. 
Given Ennanda's record of selectively ignoring Islamist violence, that 
investigation cannot be left to its appointees alone. A preferable 
alternative would be to reconstitute the broad-based, multiparty 
commissions that successfully oversaw Tunisia's free elections in October 
2011 and investigated the crimes of the fallen dictatorship. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027115 
Ennanda, which captured 41 percent of the vote in the elections, promised 
to cooperate with secular parties and show respect for pluralism. Instead, it 
is sending muddled messages. On Wednesday, Prime Minister Hamadi 
Jebali made a conciliatory gesture by proposing a temporary nonpolitical 
cabinet and new elections. Unfortunately, hard-line party members quickly 
repudiated him. 
Tunisia's revolution, which has overcome past crises, can overcome this 
one if Ennanda and all other Tunisian parties recommit themselves to 
nonviolence, mutual tolerance and upholding the rule of law. 
Article 7. 
The Washington Post 
Iraq's return to bloodshed 
Kimberly Kagan and Frederick W. Kagan 
February 8, 2013 -- Eighteen days of protests in Egypt in 2011 electrified 
the world. But more than twice that many days of protest in Iraq have 
gone almost unnoticed in the United States. Iraqi army troops killed five  
Sunni protesters in Fallujah on Jan. 25, after a month of anti-government 
protests in Anbar, Nineveh and Salahuddin provinces and elsewhere for 
which thousands turned out. Al-Qaeda in Iraq and Iranian-backed Shiite 
militias are re-mobilizing. Iraq teeters on the brink of renewed insurgency 
and, potentially, civil war. 
This crisis matters for America. U.S. vital interests that have been 
undermined over the past year include preventing Iraq from becoming a 
haven for al-Qaeda and destabilizing the region by becoming a security 
vacuum or a dictatorship that inflames sectarian civil war; containing 
Iranian influence in the region; and ensuring the free flow of oil to the 
global market. 
While tensions have risen over the past two years, the triggers for recent 
eruptions are clear. Prime Minister Noun al-Maliki, a Shiite, had the 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027116 
bodyguards of Finance Minister Rafie al-Issawi, who is Sunni, arrested for 
alleged terrorist activities on Dec. 20 — almost exactly one year after he 
ordered the arrest of Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi's security 
detail. Hashimi fled to Turkey and is unlikely to return soon to Iraq, where 
he was sentenced to death after Maliki demanded his trial in absentia for 
murder and financing terrorism. 
The threat to Issawi, a moderate technocrat from Anbar, galvanized Iraqi 
Sunnis, who rightly saw Maliki's move as sectarian and an assault on 
government participation by Sunnis not under the prime minister's thumb. 
Three days after the arrests, demonstrations broke out in Ramadi, Fallujah 
and Samarra. Three days after that, a large protest closed the highway  
from Baghdad to Syria and Jordan. The popular resistance spread to Mosul 
on Dec. 27. 
These protests erupted during a constitutional crisis and as an expanding 
Arab-Kurd conflict has become increasingly militarized. Iraqi President 
Jalal Talabani was incapacitated by a stroke on Dec. 17 and has been out 
of the countryfor treatment. Iraq's constitution specifies a line of 
succession — but with one vice president in exile and the other a Shiite 
and obvious Maliki proxy, Iraq has been, in effect, operating without a 
president. Political processes that require presidential involvement have 
been paralyzed, including moving forward with long-standing efforts by 
Sunnis and Kurds to hold a parliamentary vote of no-confidence in Maliki. 
Talabani had been the critical link holding Baghdad and Kurdistan 
together since tensions rose following a 10-day standoff between Iraqi 
army units and Kurdish pesh merga troops in October, after Maliki sent 
the army toward the disputed city of Kirkuk. That move followed a series 
of skirmishes and mobilizations along the "Green Line" separating 
Kurdistan from Arab Iraq and a series of attacks in the area by al-Qaeda in 
Iraq. 
The recent protests underscore the collapse of the inclusive political 
accommodation reached in 2007, which had been reconfirmed by the 
formation of a grand Sunni-Shiite-Kurd coalition government after 
parliamentary elections in 2010. By November 2012, Maliki had evolved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027117 
to openly discussing his intention to form a "majoritarian government" 
that would exclude the most important Sunni representatives. In mid-
December he participated in creating a Shiite grand alliance as the 
launching pad for that government. The principal Sunni political leaders, 
including Issawi, parliamentary speaker Osama al-Nujaifiand Anbari tribal 
leader Ahmed abu Rishaannounced their intention to form their own 
coalition. In short, Iraqi politics was re-fragmenting along sectarian and 
ethnic lines even before the protests began. 
Understood in this context, the Iraqi army's killing of protesters in 
Fallujah last month is a watershed event similar to the destruction of the 
Askariya shrine in Samarra in February 2006, though the crisis will not 
escalate as quickly. Sunni-Shiite tensions have hitherto played out in 
political forums. The key actors in today's crisis are not the Sunni political 
leaders but, rather, Anbari tribal leaders, including Ali Hatem Ali 
Suleiman, one of the most powerful leaders of Iraq's largest Sunni tribe. 
Suleiman and fellow leaders of the Dulaim tribe were essential to 
engineering the Anbar Awakening in 2007 and Sunni participation in the 
government, for which they rejected al-Qaeda in Iraq and renounced 
violence against the state. They responded to the killings of protesters last 
month by threatening open war against the state for the first time since 
2007. So far at least, they have restrained protesters and resisted violent 
confrontation. 
For his part, Maliki has sought to deescalate the conflict and to mollify 
protesters. Tehran has also been working — to persuade Iraq's Sadrists, 
whom Maliki has alienated in his consolidation of power, to abandon their 
support for their Sunni brethren. Their combined efforts appear to be 
working: The Sadrist Bloc, which had refused Maliki's request for 
suggestions to replace Issawi and other Sunni politicians, has put forth a 
substitute finance minister. 
These efforts, ostensibly toward political resolution, actually increase the 
likelihood of sectarian war by continuing the marginalization of Sunni 
political leaders without addressing Sunni tribes' core grievances — and 
by re-creating a Shiite front that had splintered. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027118 
Al-Qaeda in Iraq has already taken advantage of this situation through its 
front group, the Islamic State of Iraq, which deployed combat teams in 
Fallujah last month that targeted Iraqi army positions and killed several 
soldiers. The jihadists' black flags have appeared at Sunni protests and 
memorial ceremonies for the fallen. The group is back in the havens it 
held in 2006. If Maliki does not allow proper Sunni representation in 
government, al-Qaeda will gain greater popular tolerance and foreign 
support. 
Over the past year, the situation in Iraq has become explosive while 
sectarian sentiment and armed violence in neighboring nations have 
escalated dramatically. Americans have become accustomed to watching 
Iraq approach the precipice and draw back. But circumstances have 
changed with the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and Maliki's year-long 
efforts to intimidate his opponents through political, judicial and military 
maneuvers. If Maliki does not accept many of the protesters' reasonable 
demands and allow meaningful Sunni participation in government, 
prospects for stopping Iraq's descent into sectarian conflict are grim. 
Kimberly Kagan is president of the Institute for the Study of War. 
Frederick W. Kagan is director of the Critical Threats Project and a 
scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. 
',allele 8. 
The American Spectator  
Islam and Islamism in the Modern World  
An interview with Daniel Pipes (By Tom Bethell) 
February 2013 -- Daniel Pipes, one of our leading experts on Islam, 
established the Middle East Forum and became its head in 1994. He was 
born in 1949 and grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His father, 
Richard Pipes, was a professor of Russian history, now emeritus, at 
Harvard. Daniel studied Arabic and Islamic history and lived in Cairo for 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027119 
three years. His PhD dissertation became his first book, Slave Soldiers 
and Islam (1981). Then his interest in purely academic subjects expanded 
to include modern Islam. He left the university because, as he told an 
interviewer from Harvard Magazine, he has "the simple politics of a truck 
driver, not the complex ones of an academic." His story of being 
harassed through the legal system by a Muslim who later committed 
suicide was recently told in The American Spectator ("A Palestinian in 
Texas," TAS, November 2012). He has been personally threatened but 
prefers not to talk about specifics except to note that law enforcement has 
been involved. I interviewed Pipes shortly before Christmas, when the 
Egyptians were voting on their new constitution. I started out by saying 
that the number of Muslims in the U.S. has doubled since the 9/11 attacks. 
DP: My career divides in two: before and after 9/11. In the first part I was 
trying to show that Islam is relevant to political concerns. If you want to 
understand Muslims, I argued, you need to understand the role of Islam in 
their lives. Now that seems obvious. If anything, there's a tendency to 
over-emphasize Islam; to assume that Muslims are dominated by the 
Koran and are its automatons—which goes too far. You can't just read the 
Koran to understand Muslim life. You have to look at history, at 
personalities, at economics, and so on. 
TB: Do you see the revival of Islam as a reality? 
DP: Yes. Half a century ago Islam was waning, the application of its laws 
became ever more remote, and the sense existed that Islam, like other 
religions, was in decline. Since then there has been a sharp and I think 
indisputable reversal. We're all talking about Islam and its laws now. 
TB: At the same time you have raised an odd question: "Can Islam 
survive Islamism?" Can you explain that? 
DP: I draw a distinction between traditional Islam and Islamism. Islamism 
emerged in its modern form in the 1920s and is driven by a belief that 
Muslims can be strong and rich again if they follow the Islamic law 
severely and in its entirety. This is a response to the trauma of modern 
Islam. And yet this form of Islam is doing deep damage to faith, to the 
point that I wonder if Islam will ever recover. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027120 
TB: Give us the historical context. 
DP: The modern era for Muslims began with Napoleon's invasion of 
Egypt in 1798. Muslims experienced a great shock at seeing how 
advanced the blue-eyed peoples from the north had become. It would be 
roughly analogous to the Eskimos coming down south and decimating 
Westerners, who would uncomprehendingly ask in response, "Who are 
these people and how are they defeating us?" 
TB: So how did they respond? 
DP: Muslims over the past 200 years have made many efforts to figure out 
what went wrong. They have experimented with several answers. One was 
to emulate liberal Europe—Britain and France—until about 1920. Another 
was to emulate illiberal Europe—Germany and Russia—until about 1970. 
The third was to go back to what are imagined to be the sources of Islamic 
strength a millennium ago, namely the application of Islamic law. That's 
Islamism. It's a modern phenomenon, and it's making Muslims the center 
of world unrest. 
TB: But it is also creating discomfort? 
DP: It has terribly deleterious effects on Muslims. Many of them are put 
off by Islam. In Iran, for example, one finds a lot of alienation from Islam 
as a result of the Islamist rule of the last 30-odd years. 
TB: Has it happened anywhere else? 
DP: One hears reports, especially from Algeria and Iraq, of Muslims 
converting to Christianity. And in an unprecedented move, ex-Muslims 
living in the West have organized with the goal of becoming a political 
force. I believe the first such effort was the Centraal Comite voor Ex-
moslims in the Netherlands, but now it's all over the place. 
TB: Nonetheless, Islam has lasted for 1,500 years. 
DP: Yes, but modern Islamism has been around only since the 1920s, and 
I predict it will not last as a world-threatening force for more than a few 
decades. Will Muslims leave the faith or simply stop practicing it? These 
are the sort of questions I expect to be current before long. 
TB: What about Islam in the United States? 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027121 
DP: In the long term, the United States could greatly benefit Islam by 
uniquely freeing the religion from government constraints and permitting 
it to evolve in a positive, modern direction. But that's the long term. Right 
now, American Muslims labor under Saudi and other influences, their 
institutions are extreme, and things are heading in a destructive direction. 
It's also distressing to see how non-Muslim individuals and institutions, 
particularly those on the left, indulge Islamist misbehavior. 
TB: How do they do that? 
DP: Well, turn on the television, go to a class, follow the work of the 
ACLU or the Southern Poverty Law Center, and you will see corporations, 
nonprofits, and government institutions working with the Islamists, 
helping promote the Islamist agenda. The American left and the Islamists 
agree on what they dislike—conservatives—and, despite their profound 
differences, they cooperate. 
TB: Presumably some Muslims here deconvert, right? 
DP: There are some conversions out of Islam, yes. And the Muslim 
establishment in this country is quite concerned about that. But 
numerically it is not a significant number. 
TB: The ones who convert don't talk about it very much? 
DP: In some cases they do; they take advantage of Western freedoms to 
speak their minds. They are the exceptions, though. 
TB: I suspect that the decline of Christianity has encouraged Islam. 
DP: Very much so, as the contrast between Europe and the United States 
reveals. The hard kernel of American Christian faith, not present in 
Europe, means that Islamists are far better behaved in the United States. 
They see the importance of a Christian counterforce. 
TB: Earlier, you mentioned Algeria. It is a big Muslim state that we 
don't hear about today. 
DP: Twenty years ago Algeria was a major focus of attention. That long 
ago ended, although in France coverage is still significant. Algeria is ripe 
for the same kind of upheaval that we have seen in other North African 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027122 
states, such as Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt. I think it is likely to happen 
before too long. 
TB: What about Syria? 
DP: Assad's power is steadily diminishing and I cannot see how his 
regime will remain long in power. 
TB: Should the United States get involved there? 
DP: No, Americans have no dog in this fight and nothing in the U.S. 
Constitution requires us to get involved in every foreign conflict. Two 
wretched forces are killing each other; just look at the ghastly videos of 
the two sides torturing and executing the other. Listen also to what they 
are saying. It's a civil war involving the bad and the worse. I don't want 
the U.S. government involved. That would mean bearing some moral 
responsibility for what emerges, which I expect to be very unsavory. 
TB: So you are supporting the Obama position? 
DP: Yes, though he reaches it with far more angst. Also, there appears to 
be some serious, clandestine U.S. support for the rebel forces. The 
September 11 meeting in Benghazi between the Turkish and the American 
ambassadors was very curious. They are both based in Tripoli, hundreds 
of miles away. What were they doing in Benghazi? Arranging for 
American arms going via Turkey to Syria, it appears. 
TB: How important has Israel been to the revival of Islam? 
DP: It is a major factor in the neighboring states. But elsewhere, in 
Morocco, Iran, Malaysia, it has minor importance. 
TB: Since the "Arab Spring," Israel seems increasingly beleaguered. 
DP: Not really, not yet, though I agree that it will be more beleaguered 
with time. Its neighbors are so consumed with their own affairs that they 
hardly pay Israel attention. But once the neighbors get their houses in 
order, Israel will most likely face new difficulties. 
TB: You have questioned U.S. support for Islamic democracy, which 
does seem naive. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027123 
DP: The U.S. has been the patron for democracy for a century, since 
Wilson's 14 Points, and a wonderful heritage it has been. When an 
American travels the world, he finds himself in country after country 
where his country played a monumentally positive role, especially in 
democratizing the system. We naturally want to extend this to Muslim-
majority countries. Sadly, these for some time have offered an unpleasant 
choice between brutal and greedy dictators or ideological, extreme, and 
antagonistic elected Islamists. It's not a choice we should accept. 
TB: So what should we do? 
DP: I offer three simple guidelines. One, always oppose the Islamists. Like 
fascists and Communists, they are the totalitarian enemy, whether they 
wear long beards in Pakistan or suits in Washington. 
Two, always support the liberal, modern, secular people who share our 
worldview. They look to us for moral and other sustenance; we should be 
true to them. They are not that strong, and cannot take power soon 
anywhere, but they represent hope, offering the Muslim world's only 
prospect of escape from the dreary dichotomy of dictatorship or 
extremism. 
Three, and more difficult, cooperate with dictators but condition it on 
pushing them toward reform and opening up. We need the Mubaraks of 
the world and they need us. Fine, but relentlessly keep the pressure on 
them to improve their rule. Had we begun this process with Abdullah 
Saleh of Yemen in 1978 or with Mubarak in 1981, things could have been 
very different by 2011. But we didn't. 
TB: Egypt might be the test case. 
DP: Well, it's a bit late. Mohammed Morsi is not a greedy dictator but he 
emerged from the Muslim Brotherhood, and his efforts since reaching 
power have been purely Islamist. 
TB: What about the recent elections? 
DP: I do not believe that a single one of the elections and referenda in 
Egypt was fairly conducted. It surprises me that Western governments and 
media are so gullible on this score. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027124 
TB: You could say we were supporting the democracy element in Cairo's 
Tahrir Square. Were we not? 
DP: Yes and rightly so. The initial demonstrations of early 2011 were 
spearheaded by the liberals and seculars who deserve U.S. support. But 
they got quickly pushed aside and Washington barely paid them further 
attention. 
TB: We gave foreign aid to Mubarak. Was that a bad idea? 
DP: That aid dates back to the utterly different circumstances of the 
Egypt-Israel peace treaty of 1979 and became progressively more wrong-
headed. It should long ago have been discontinued. More broadly, I 
believe in aid for emergencies (soup and blankets) and as a bribe, but not 
for economic development. That the Obama administration is 
contemplating aid, including military hardware, to the Morsi government 
outrages me. 
Click here to Reply or Forward 
22.2 GB (10%) of 210.1 GBManage 
©2013 Google - Terms & Privacy 
Last account activity: 0 minutes ago 
Details 
*********************************************************** 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
Jeffrey Epstein 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 027125
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #2
================================================================================
Date: 2/11/2013 5:45:09 PM
Subject: prep for dinner, israel pres briefing /
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Wall Street Journal 
The Ayatollah Always Says No  
Editorial 
February 8, 2013 --The Farsi word for "no" is na h, which is easy enough 
to remember. Maybe even Joe Biden won't forget it the next time the U.S. 
tries to reach out diplomatically to Iran. 
We're speaking of the Administration's latest effort to come to terms with 
Tehran over its nuclear programs, which Mr. Biden made last weekend at 
the Munich Security Conference. The U.S. offer of direct bilateral talks, 
he said, "stands, but it must be real and tangible." Iranian foreign minister 
Ali Akbar Salehi, who was also at the conference though he refused to 
meet with U.S. officials, called Mr. Biden's comments "a step forward." 
Mr. Salehi's remark set the usual hearts aflutter that Iran is finally serious 
about a deal. But the optimism was brief On Thursday, Iran's Supreme 
Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei flatly rejected direct talks with the U.S. 
"The U.S. is pointing a gun at Iran and wants us to talk to them," he said. 
"Direct talks will not solve any problems." 
This isn't the first time Mr. Khamenei has played chaste Daphne to 
President Obama's infatuated Apollo. Just after becoming President in 
2009, Mr. Obama sent the Ayatollah two private letters and delivered a 
conciliatory speech for the Persian new year of Nowruz. Mr. Khamenei's 
answer: "They chant the slogan of change but no change is seen in 
practice." He told a crowd chanting "death to America" that "if a hand is 
stretched covered with a velvet glove but it is cast iron inside, that makes 
no sense." 
That was in March 2009. In October of that year the U.S. and its allies 
tentatively worked out a deal with Iranian negotiators to move some of 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028728 
their enriched uranium outside Iran. Western analysts were confident that 
Mr. Khamenei would give his blessing, given the international pressure he 
was said to be under following the fraudulent elections and the bloody 
crackdown that followed. 
The Ayatollah quashed that deal too: "Whenever they [Americans] smile 
at the officials of the Islamic revolution, when we carefully look at the 
situation, we notice that they are hiding a dagger behind their back." 
It was the same in January 2011, when diplomacy also collapsed. Ditto in 
2012, when negotiations in February, May and June each ended in failure. 
Washington went into those talks thinking they were going to succeed on 
the theory that Tehran desperately wants relief from the supposedly 
crippling pressure of economic sanctions. 
Why does the Ayatollah keep saying no? The conventional wisdom is that 
previous U.S. offers weren't generous enough, or that the wrong President 
was in the White House, or that Iran wants only to deal directly with the 
U.S. and not in multilateral forums. Each of these theories has been tested 
and shown to be false. 
A more persuasive explanation—get ready for this shocker—is that Iran 
really wants a bomb. The regime believes, not unreasonably, that 
Moammar Gadhafi would still be in power had he not given up his nuclear 
program in 2003. Mr. Khamenei also fears a "velvet revolution" scenario, 
in which more normal ties with the West threaten the ideological 
foundations of the Islamic Republic. Confrontation with America is in this 
regime's DNA. 
Meantime, the pretense of negotiations has allowed Tehran to play for 
time to advance its programs. When Mr. Obama took office, Iran had 
enriched 1,000 kilos of reactor-grade uranium. In its last report from 
November, U.N. inspectors found that Iran has produced 7,611 kilos to 
reactor grade, along with 232 kilos of uranium enriched to 20%, which is 
close to bomb-grade. Last month, Iran declared that it would install 3,000 
advanced centrifuges at its Natanz facility, which can enrich uranium at 
two to three times its current rate. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028729 
As for the sanctions, they may hurt ordinary Iranians but this regime is 
famously indifferent to the suffering of its own people. The Ayatollah also 
doesn't seem to take the Administration's talk about "all options being on 
the table" seriously. Mr. Obama's nomination of Iran dove Chuck Hagel to 
be Secretary of Defense reinforces that impression, as do reports that the 
White House blocked Pentagon and CIA plans to arm the opposition that's 
fighting to overthrow Iran's client regime in Damascus. An America that 
won't help proxies in a proxy war isn't likely to take the fight directly to 
Iran's nuclear facilities. 
In rejecting Mr. Biden's offer, the Ayatollah said frankly, "I'm not a 
diplomat; I'm a revolutionary." Another round of multilateral talks with 
Iran is set to resume this month, but maybe Joe Biden and his boss should 
start taking no for an answer. 
Article 2. 
Foreign Policy 
Let's face it: Obama's Iran policy is failing  
James Traub 
February 8, 2013 -- There is no better example of an Obama 
administration initiative that has succeeded on its own terms, and yet 
failed as policy, than Iran. By engaging the regime in Tehran, and being 
rebuffed, the White House has been able to enlist China, Russia, and the 
European Union in imposing tough sanctions on Iran. By steadily 
ratcheting up those sanctions, the administration has been able to 
gradually squeeze the Iranian economy. By insisting that "containment" is 
not an option, Obama has persuaded Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu that he need not launch an attack on Iran's nuclear facilities --
at least not any time soon. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028730 
Obama has done everything right, and yet his Iran policy is failing. There 
is no evidence that the sanctions will bring Iran to its knees and force the 
supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to accept the humiliation of 
abandoning his nuclear program. But neither is there any sign of new 
thinking in the White House. "I don't see how what didn't work last year is 
going to work this year," says Vali Nasr, who served in the Obama State 
Department before becoming dean of the Johns Hopkins School of 
Advanced International Studies. He might not get much of an argument 
from White House officials, who, the New York Times recently noted, 
"seem content with stalemate." 
The United States is not negotiating directly with Iran but rather doing so 
through the P5+1, which consists of the five permanent Security Council 
members and Germany. The P5+1's current position is that Iran must stop 
enriching nuclear fuel to 20 percent purity -- a point from which Iran 
could quickly move to weapons-grade material -- transfer its existing stock 
of such fuel to a third country, and shut down one of its two enrichment 
facilities, known as Fordow. In exchange, the parties will help Iran 
produce such fuel for medical purposes, which the regime claims is its 
actual goal. Iran has refused, saying it will not shut down Fordow. 
But the current state of play masks the larger issue, which is that the 
ayatollah and those around him believe the United States wants to make 
Iran cry uncle -- which happens to be true. The next round of P5+1 
negotiations, now scheduled for Feb. 25 in Kazakhstan, are almost 
certainly not going to go anywhere unless the United States signals that it 
is prepared to make what the Iranians view as meaningful and equivalent 
moves in exchange for Iranian concessions. Arms-control experts say that 
both British Prime Minister David Cameron and Catherine Ashton, head 
of foreign affairs for the European Union, favor offering Iran a reduction 
in sanctions; but there's a limit to what they can do without the United 
States. 
Of course, such flexibility would be pointless if Iran is simply hell-bent on 
gaining the capacity to produce a nuclear weapon. The signals, as always 
with Iran, are cryptic. Iranian authorities have told nuclear inspectors that 
they plan to install a new generation of centrifuges in order to accelerate 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028731 
enrichment. And yet Iran also chose to convert some of its stockpile of 
highly enriched uranium for medical use rather than approach the amount 
needed for a bomb, leading Israeli authorities to predict that Iran wouldn't 
be able to build a bomb before 2015 or 2016. Last week, Ali Akbar 
Velayati, Khamenei's foreign policy advisor, publicly criticized officials 
who have treated the negotiations dismissively. Presumably, he was 
thinking of President Mahmoud Ahmadinej ad, who has compared Iran's 
nuclear program to a train without brakes. 
Iran is now at the outset of what promises to be a raucous presidential 
election, and may be no more capable of serious negotiations between now 
and June than the United States was in 2012. But what is clear is that the 
sanctions have moderated Iranian behavior and rhetoric. At the same time, 
as the Times also noted, the economic pressure is not nearly great enough 
to compel concessions that the regime would view as a blow to national 
pride. In short, Iran might -- might -- be more willing to accept a face-
saving compromise than they were a year or two ago, but will need serious 
inducements to do so. 
What would that entail? Virtually all the proposals that have come from 
outside experts suggest that the P5+1 begin with modest confidence-
building measures, especially in the period before the election. A recent 
report by the Arms Control Association enumerates several of them. 
Western diplomats, for example, could take up Ali Akbar Salehi, Iran's 
foreign minister, on his proposal to limit the "extent" of enrichment -- i.e., 
well below 20 percent -- in exchange for fuel rods for the research reaction 
and a recognition of Iran's "right to enrich," a notional concept the United 
States already supports under specified conditions. Or Iran could suspend 
20-percent enrichment in exchange for a suspension of new sanctions. But 
Iran is unlikely to accept even such small steps unless it felt that additional 
moves would win additional explicit concessions. 
Beyond that, the outlines of what in Middle East peacemaking is known as 
"final status" are clear enough: Iran agrees to verifiable inspections to 
ensure that it does not enrich uranium beyond 3.5 percent and does not 
pursue a nuclear weapons program, while the West accepts Iran's "right to 
enrich" and dismantles sanctions. Of course, the outlines of a Middle East 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028732 
peace deal are clear enough, too. But in both cases, neither side trusts the 
other, and each demands that the other go first. Instead, nobody goes 
anywhere. 
U.S. officials have very good reason to be wary of Iran's bona fides. In 
2009, they reached a deal with Iranian negotiators to send the stockpile of 
highly enriched uranium out of the country -- only to see the ayatollah 
repudiate it. As Ray Takeyh, an Iran expert with the Council on Foreign 
Relations puts it, "Khamenei has created a politics where it's hard for him 
to compromise." But so has the United States. Anyone who watched 
Chuck Hagel's confirmation hearing knows that it is an article of faith in 
Congress -- and pretty much a bipartisan one -- that Iran is a faithless, 
illegitimate terrorist state that will be deterred from building a bomb only 
by the threat of massive attack. Had Hagel been foolish enough to suggest 
that the United States offer to reduce sanctions in exchange for Iranian 
concessions, the White House would have had to find a new candidate for 
defense secretary. 
It's the U.S. Congress that arguably holds the high cards, though the White 
House put them in its hands. The most potent sanctions are legislated, and 
have been written in such a way that they will be very hard to unwind. 
Obama can waive them for up to six months. But the ayatollah is not about 
to make irreversible decisions in exchange for six months of relief. 
The White House is thus stuck between Tehran and Capitol Hill. And it 
can't live long with the current stalemate. After all, Obama has said that 
"containment" is not an option. He is hoping that the combination of 
economic pain and fear of military action will bring Tehran to its senses. If 
it doesn't, the president has said that he is prepared to use force. Perhaps 
he feels that just as spurned engagement served as the predicate for tough 
sanctions, so would failed negotiations lay the predicate for a broadly 
supported strike against Iran's nuclear facilities. Iran left us no choice, he 
might say, as the bombers fly. 
That would constitute a diplomatic triumph ... if a strike against Iran's 
nuclear facilities is a good idea. If in fact it's a dreadful prospect -- worse, 
perhaps, even than containment -- then it would constitute a failure that 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028733 
would obliterate the record of adroit diplomacy of the last four years. 
Obama understands very well -- even if many members of Congress do 
not -- that even our worst adversaries have interests of their own, that 
those interests feel as legitimate to them as ours do to us, and that we at 
least have a chance of settling disputes with them if we can find the place 
where our interests overlap. The time has come for him to apply that 
wisdom to Iran. 
James Traub is a fellow of the Center on International Cooperation. 
Article 3. 
The National  
An uneasy courtship as Iran and Egypt test 
the waters  
Alan Philps 
Feb 8, 2013 -- There is a consensus among commentators that the visit of 
the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, to Egypt - complete with 
red carpet and kiss on both cheeks from President Mohammed Morsi - 
does not amount to a breakthrough. The view of US think-tanks is that it 
does not amount to very much at all, and certainly not worth getting 
anxious about. Such a consensus is always dangerous, and it is worth 
looking more closely at what it is based on. 
Mr Ahmadinejad is the first Iranian leader to set foot in Cairo since the 
deposed Shah of Iran was given refuge in Cairo, where he died and 
received a state funeral. The two countries have not had diplomatic 
relations since 1979. 
The Iranian president's visit has deep historical significance, even if he 
came as a guest of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference summit. 
The picture of the two presidents embracing says to the world: Egypt is 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028734 
released from the US straitjacket and is free to resume its position as a 
regional power. 
There are plenty of reasons, however, to dismiss the visit as just show. Mr 
Ahmadinejad is a lame duck, banned by the constitution from running for 
a third term in the June elections. As Iran moves into a period of war 
economy under the pressure of sanctions designed to curb its nuclear 
programme, Mr Ahmadinejad is engaged in a furious struggle to ensure 
that his rival, the parliamentary speaker, Ali Larijani, does not succeed 
him. The corruption allegations levelled by Mr Ahmadinejad against the 
Larijani family are deeply damaging to the Iranian regime. 
Mr Morsi, meanwhile, has little to show Egyptians that he has improved 
their lot. Cairo is the scene of near-constant street battles and the economy 
is tanking. Egypt's currency reserves have just sunk to $13.6 billion (Dh50 
billion), below the critical level needed to cover three months of imports. 
The country is staring bankruptcy in the face, but cannot access 
emergency funds from the International Monetary Fund without 
implementing unpopular reforms that would further raise social tensions. 
Both leaders need to show that they have "friends" abroad. The reality is a 
little different. Egypt and Iran appear to be divided by the Syria conflict, 
which is symptomatic of the wider split between the Sunni Muslim 
powers, led by Saudi Arabia, and Iran's faltering "axis of resistance" that, 
with Syria in play and Hamas having defected, now looks increasingly like 
a Shia Muslim axis. 
If we look more closely, then the story of Egypt resuming its role as a 
regional power looks premature. At this stage, Egypt is trying to find some 
space to manoeuvre between Saudi Arabia and Iran. Given that Saudi 
Arabia has the money that Egypt needs, and Washington has a lock on the 
actions of the IMF, that space is limited. 
But what does Washington think? Not very much at the moment. With 
President Barack Obama's second term team still being assembled, it is not 
surprising that there is something of a vacuum in Middle East policy. But 
the issue is deeper than that. The Obama administration has declared it 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028735 
wants to focus on the Asia-Pacific region and, surprisingly, it means what 
it says. 
Only a year after troops withdrew from Iraq, that country is not talked 
about in Washington, like an embarrassing relative. In North Africa, the 
US military has taken a back seat while the work of toppling Colonel 
Muammar Qaddafi and driving back the jihadists in Mali has been left to 
Franco-British forces. Syrian policy is one of drift, where the 
administration finds all options unpalatable. In Egypt, Washington has set 
a red line for the Muslim Brotherhood leadership: it must adhere to the 
peace treaty with Israel. Everything else is negotiable. 
This week the Pentagon revealed that it would no longer be stationing two 
aircraft carriers in the Gulf region, as it has done for most of the past two 
years, due to cuts in the defence budget, and the possibility of even more 
stringent ones if Congress fails to agree on raising the US debt ceiling. 
The Iranian nuclear programme remains a priority in Washington, but the 
carrier decision indicates a less warlike stance. One cannot say that US 
power is ebbing, but there is a clear lack of political will in Washington 
for decisive action in the Middle East. For now, the logic is that regional 
powers will have to take more responsibility. Egypt, although impotent at 
the moment, will have to find its role. The US needs to talk to Iran if there 
is ever going to be a compromise on its nuclear programme. Maybe Egypt 
could help. 
Both Egypt and Iran have denied a report that General Qassem Suleimani, 
commander of the Quds force, a division of the Iranian Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps, and the man responsible for Iran's military 
operations in Syria, visited Cairo in January. There was no reaction in 
Washington to this report. 
If there is going to be a resolution of the Syrian crisis without a decade of 
Lebanon-style war, then allies of the US will have to speak to someone of 
the calibre of Gen Suleimani, a far more important figure than Mr 
Ahmadinejad. Could this lead to a historic compromise between the 
Muslim Brotherhood and the ayatollahs to create a new Islamic front 
spreading revolution? 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028736 
That is out of the question. Egypt is too reliant on foreign finance, which 
Iran cannot offer at the moment, for it to swing into Tehran's orbit. And 
there is far too much domestic opposition. 
What is clear is that while the US is reluctant to take direct responsibility, 
other countries must find ways of resolving the regional contradictions 
that have become unmanageable in the era of American tutelage. That will 
lead to some unlikely meetings taking place. The Morsi-Ahmadinejad 
embrace may not be a breakthrough, but it does show one thing: what was 
unthinkable a few years ago may one day be the norm. 
Article 4. 
Al-Monitor 
llamas Weighs Options For Recognizing Israel 
Adnan Abu Amer 
February 8 -- Recently, a lot has been said — and a lot of denials have 
been issued — about Hamas recognizing a two-state solution. It appears 
that Hamas is still vacillating between explicitly and implicitly 
recognizing Israel. Hamas realizes that recognizing Israel would open up 
the world's doors to the movement. At the same time, Hamas knows that 
such a move would be seen as a betrayal by the movement's supporters, 
both inside and outside Palestine. As Hamas well knows, its legitimacy 
derives from its vocal support for armed struggle within the complicated 
Palestinian reality. Hamas also knows that it will pay a heavy price if it is 
seen to be agreeing to international conditions. The cost will not only be 
political, but also ideological. Hamas has spent many years talking and 
writing about its notion of the state, its identity, borders, concept, 
constitution and the role of Islam within it. Generations of Hamas 
members were raised on those ideas. But those ideas have remained part 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028737 
of the imagination and heritage, and of the nostalgic dream of restoring the 
Islamic caliphate. 
The concept of the state 
Today's debate within Hamas over the concept of the state is more 
concrete than theoretical. The political conditions in the Palestinian 
territories do not allow for dreaming about unrealistic grand theories being 
promoted by some Islamist movements. Hamas is facing real-world 
problems that require real-world solutions. The Palestinian state being 
envisioned by Palestinian, Arab, and world politicians is based on the June 
1967 borders. But does that fit Hamas's political vision and intellectual 
orientation? Generations of Islamists have been raised on the concept of 
the "Islamic state," which is synonymous with the Islamic caliphate. But 
Hamas's situation is a little different. Israel's occupation of all Palestinian 
territories is a political and concrete obstacle to the dream of an Islamic 
state and it forces the consideration of more realistic options. So we have 
started hearing, from Hamas, statements about establishing a Palestinian 
state on the June 1967 borders. There is no doubt that this development is 
an intellectual and political shift by Hamas. More than 20 years ago, 
Hamas founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin proposed a long truce with Israel. 
But today, such a proposal is more realistic and is attributed to Hamas's 
current leader Khaled Meshaal. Hamas in 2013 is different than Hamas in 
1993. Hamas is now an influential player and its statements and stances 
are taken into account by regional and international decision-making 
circles. 
Recognition and commitment 
The shuttle diplomacy by Western officials between Gaza, where Hamas's 
domestic leadership is located, and the Arab capitals of Doha, Cairo and 
Amman have only one objective: getting Hamas to agree to the conditions 
that would allow it to be embraced by the international community. In 
other words, they want Hamas to agree to the two-state solution. And that, 
explicitly or implicitly, essentially means that Hamas has recognized 
Israel's right to exist! Those who have been following Hamas's course 
since it was founded 25 years ago notice that every once in awhile there is 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028738 
international pressure to make Hamas agree to those conditions. But 
Hamas is afraid to fall into the same trap that others, like Fatah, have 
fallen into without getting anything in return except loss of popular 
support, as was demonstrated in the elections seven years ago. In light of 
the demands that the movement should recognize the two-state solution 
and make political commitments, some influential circles within the 
Hamas leadership think that the movement is being drawn into going 
beyond its rational political discourse and how it deals with the reality on 
the ground, and into recognizing Israel and exchanging messages with 
it. However, the siege has made the Palestinian territories miserable. So 
decision-makers in Hamas are forced to issue hints and signals that do not 
affect the movement's general principles. Those signals, however, may be 
misunderstood. And this is where the problem lies. No one thinks that 
Hamas supporters will make a big deal of those signals, but any concrete 
steps toward recognizing Israel will cost Hamas dearly, something which I 
don't think Hamas wants during this dangerous phase. At the external 
level, Hamas's enemies and opponents may think that the siege has finally 
paid off, albeit a little late, and that Hamas's current declarations are 
signals that, if the siege and the Palestinian suffering continue, the 
movement may explicitly recognize Israel, which would open the 
"appetite" of Hamas' opponents for more breakthroughs in its ideology 
and principles. 
Not an existential conflict, but a border dispute. 
Although Hamas is aware of all that, it should be noted that in a few 
months it is facing elections during which the movement's signals that it 
may accept a two-state solution will be used in a fierce anti-Hamas 
campaign. Even though the movement has provided a different 
administrative performance than before, the fundamental change in the 
movement's political program may be a decisive factor for the Palestinian 
voters. As Hamas is being smothered, with a few breaches here and there, 
the demands that it should recognize Israel are ongoing and without letup. 
In other words, Hamas must choose between recognizing Israel to stay in 
power, or losing what it has achieved democratically as punishment for 
having to refused to bow to the world's conditions. In reality, the 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028739 
international community has not significantly changed its relationship with 
the Palestinians, including Hamas, over the past months and years. There 
has only been some cosmetic and tactical changes. Washington, the 
European Union and the UN have not only signaled to Hamas that it 
should join the "broken and paralyzed" peace process, they have also 
insisted that the Palestinians explicitly recognize Israel. But this time, 
those powers are armed with an "Islamic religious cloak," which would 
make a recognition of Israel more meaningful, especially since Hamas 
considers its conflict with Israel to be an ideological "existential conflict, 
not a border dispute." That pressure is accompanied with a financial and 
economic blockade, which is increasing the pressure on Hamas, especially 
since those carrying out the blockade are blocking anything that would 
alleviate Palestinian suffering. It is clear that they want to punish the 
Palestinians for electing Hamas and warn them against reelecting them; 
that is if the reconciliation succeeds and the elections happen on time. It 
should be noted that certain Israeli and Western research institutions have 
estimated the timeframe that Hamas will need to explicitly recognize 
Israel. They may accept from Hamas certain rhetorical signals for a while 
before the movement officially recognizes Israel. Since Hamas was 
founded in late 1987, it has been conducting an ideological and political 
campaign for its members and supporters against recognizing Israel. 
Hamas' constitution says that Israel is a "cancer that must be eradicated," 
and that "its demise is a Quranic inevitability." Those and other slogans 
have been a key component of Hamas's political discourse. It is therefore 
not easy for Hamas to change overnight due to political realism and 
suddenly tell its supporters: We shall recognize Israel, but it's under 
duress! 
Adnan Abu Amer is Dean of the Faculty of Arts, and a lecturer in the 
history of the Palestinian issue, national security, political science and 
Islamic civilization at Al Ummah University Open Education. 
Article 6. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028740 
NYT 
An Assassination in Tunisia  
Editorial 
February 8, 2013 -- Tunisia is where the Arab Spring began just over two 
years ago. Until now it has set an encouraging example of progress toward 
democracy and pluralism. Free elections brought to power a coalition 
government pledged to pragmatic cooperation between a moderate-led 
Islamist party, Ennanda, and smaller, secular coalition partners. 
Progress has not always been smooth. But just as Tunisians inspired 
people in neighboring countries like Egypt and Libya to rise up against 
their corrupt and repressive dictators, they also seemed, for many, to point 
the way toward a democratic future accommodating both religious beliefs 
and the rights of the secular under the rule of law. 
Those hopes have been severely shaken by the murder on Wednesday of 
Chokri Belaid. Mr. Belaid, a human- rights activist and one of Ennanda's 
most outspoken critics, had publicly challenged the party's failure to 
investigate or prosecute violent acts of intimidation carried out by 
shadowy gangs of religious extremists. Mr. Belaid's killers have not yet 
been identified. But suspicion now falls on those same extremist groups, 
which had issued public threats against Mr. Belaid and other prominent 
secular leaders — without any serious government response. 
Thousands gathered for Mr. Belaid's funeral on Friday amid a nationwide 
general strike called by his trade union supporters. Tensions are high. 
What is urgently needed is a credible, independent investigation of Mr. 
Belaid's murder, followed by prosecution of the killers. 
Given Ennanda's record of selectively ignoring Islamist violence, that 
investigation cannot be left to its appointees alone. A preferable 
alternative would be to reconstitute the broad-based, multiparty 
commissions that successfully oversaw Tunisia's free elections in October 
2011 and investigated the crimes of the fallen dictatorship. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028741 
Ennanda, which captured 41 percent of the vote in the elections, promised 
to cooperate with secular parties and show respect for pluralism. Instead, it 
is sending muddled messages. On Wednesday, Prime Minister Hamadi 
Jebali made a conciliatory gesture by proposing a temporary nonpolitical 
cabinet and new elections. Unfortunately, hard-line party members quickly 
repudiated him. 
Tunisia's revolution, which has overcome past crises, can overcome this 
one if Ennanda and all other Tunisian parties recommit themselves to 
nonviolence, mutual tolerance and upholding the rule of law. 
Article 7. 
The Washington Post 
Iraq's return to bloodshed 
Kimberly Kagan and Frederick W. Kagan 
February 8, 2013 -- Eighteen days of protests in Egypt in 2011 electrified 
the world. But more than twice that many days of protest in Iraq have 
gone almost unnoticed in the United States. Iraqi army troops killed five  
Sunni protesters in Fallujah on Jan. 25, after a month of anti-government 
protests in Anbar, Nineveh and Salahuddin provinces and elsewhere for 
which thousands turned out. Al-Qaeda in Iraq and Iranian-backed Shiite 
militias are re-mobilizing. Iraq teeters on the brink of renewed insurgency 
and, potentially, civil war. 
This crisis matters for America. U.S. vital interests that have been 
undermined over the past year include preventing Iraq from becoming a 
haven for al-Qaeda and destabilizing the region by becoming a security 
vacuum or a dictatorship that inflames sectarian civil war; containing 
Iranian influence in the region; and ensuring the free flow of oil to the 
global market. 
While tensions have risen over the past two years, the triggers for recent 
eruptions are clear. Prime Minister Noun al-Maliki, a Shiite, had the 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028742 
bodyguards of Finance Minister Rafie al-Issawi, who is Sunni, arrested for 
alleged terrorist activities on Dec. 20 — almost exactly one year after he 
ordered the arrest of Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi's security 
detail. Hashimi fled to Turkey and is unlikely to return soon to Iraq, where 
he was sentenced to death after Maliki demanded his trial in absentia for 
murder and financing terrorism. 
The threat to Issawi, a moderate technocrat from Anbar, galvanized Iraqi 
Sunnis, who rightly saw Maliki's move as sectarian and an assault on 
government participation by Sunnis not under the prime minister's thumb. 
Three days after the arrests, demonstrations broke out in Ramadi, Fallujah 
and Samarra. Three days after that, a large protest closed the highway  
from Baghdad to Syria and Jordan. The popular resistance spread to Mosul 
on Dec. 27. 
These protests erupted during a constitutional crisis and as an expanding 
Arab-Kurd conflict has become increasingly militarized. Iraqi President 
Jalal Talabani was incapacitated by a stroke on Dec. 17 and has been out 
of the countryfor treatment. Iraq's constitution specifies a line of 
succession — but with one vice president in exile and the other a Shiite 
and obvious Maliki proxy, Iraq has been, in effect, operating without a 
president. Political processes that require presidential involvement have 
been paralyzed, including moving forward with long-standing efforts by 
Sunnis and Kurds to hold a parliamentary vote of no-confidence in Maliki. 
Talabani had been the critical link holding Baghdad and Kurdistan 
together since tensions rose following a 10-day standoff between Iraqi 
army units and Kurdish pesh merga troops in October, after Maliki sent 
the army toward the disputed city of Kirkuk. That move followed a series 
of skirmishes and mobilizations along the "Green Line" separating 
Kurdistan from Arab Iraq and a series of attacks in the area by al-Qaeda in 
Iraq. 
The recent protests underscore the collapse of the inclusive political 
accommodation reached in 2007, which had been reconfirmed by the 
formation of a grand Sunni-Shiite-Kurd coalition government after 
parliamentary elections in 2010. By November 2012, Maliki had evolved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028743 
to openly discussing his intention to form a "majoritarian government" 
that would exclude the most important Sunni representatives. In mid-
December he participated in creating a Shiite grand alliance as the 
launching pad for that government. The principal Sunni political leaders, 
including Issawi, parliamentary speaker Osama al-Nujaifiand Anbari tribal 
leader Ahmed abu Rishaannounced their intention to form their own 
coalition. In short, Iraqi politics was re-fragmenting along sectarian and 
ethnic lines even before the protests began. 
Understood in this context, the Iraqi army's killing of protesters in 
Fallujah last month is a watershed event similar to the destruction of the 
Askariya shrine in Samarra in February 2006, though the crisis will not 
escalate as quickly. Sunni-Shiite tensions have hitherto played out in 
political forums. The key actors in today's crisis are not the Sunni political 
leaders but, rather, Anbari tribal leaders, including Ali Hatem Ali 
Suleiman, one of the most powerful leaders of Iraq's largest Sunni tribe. 
Suleiman and fellow leaders of the Dulaim tribe were essential to 
engineering the Anbar Awakening in 2007 and Sunni participation in the 
government, for which they rejected al-Qaeda in Iraq and renounced 
violence against the state. They responded to the killings of protesters last 
month by threatening open war against the state for the first time since 
2007. So far at least, they have restrained protesters and resisted violent 
confrontation. 
For his part, Maliki has sought to deescalate the conflict and to mollify 
protesters. Tehran has also been working — to persuade Iraq's Sadrists, 
whom Maliki has alienated in his consolidation of power, to abandon their 
support for their Sunni brethren. Their combined efforts appear to be 
working: The Sadrist Bloc, which had refused Maliki's request for 
suggestions to replace Issawi and other Sunni politicians, has put forth a 
substitute finance minister. 
These efforts, ostensibly toward political resolution, actually increase the 
likelihood of sectarian war by continuing the marginalization of Sunni 
political leaders without addressing Sunni tribes' core grievances — and 
by re-creating a Shiite front that had splintered. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028744 
Al-Qaeda in Iraq has already taken advantage of this situation through its 
front group, the Islamic State of Iraq, which deployed combat teams in 
Fallujah last month that targeted Iraqi army positions and killed several 
soldiers. The jihadists' black flags have appeared at Sunni protests and 
memorial ceremonies for the fallen. The group is back in the havens it 
held in 2006. If Maliki does not allow proper Sunni representation in 
government, al-Qaeda will gain greater popular tolerance and foreign 
support. 
Over the past year, the situation in Iraq has become explosive while 
sectarian sentiment and armed violence in neighboring nations have 
escalated dramatically. Americans have become accustomed to watching 
Iraq approach the precipice and draw back. But circumstances have 
changed with the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and Maliki's year-long 
efforts to intimidate his opponents through political, judicial and military 
maneuvers. If Maliki does not accept many of the protesters' reasonable 
demands and allow meaningful Sunni participation in government, 
prospects for stopping Iraq's descent into sectarian conflict are grim. 
Kimberly Kagan is president of the Institute for the Study of War. 
Frederick W. Kagan is director of the Critical Threats Project and a 
scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. 
',allele 8. 
The American Spectator  
Islam and Islamism in the Modern World  
An interview with Daniel Pipes (By Tom Bethell) 
February 2013 -- Daniel Pipes, one of our leading experts on Islam, 
established the Middle East Forum and became its head in 1994. He was 
born in 1949 and grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His father, 
Richard Pipes, was a professor of Russian history, now emeritus, at 
Harvard. Daniel studied Arabic and Islamic history and lived in Cairo for 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028745 
three years. His PhD dissertation became his first book, Slave Soldiers 
and Islam (1981). Then his interest in purely academic subjects expanded 
to include modern Islam. He left the university because, as he told an 
interviewer from Harvard Magazine, he has "the simple politics of a truck 
driver, not the complex ones of an academic." His story of being 
harassed through the legal system by a Muslim who later committed 
suicide was recently told in The American Spectator ("A Palestinian in 
Texas," TAS, November 2012). He has been personally threatened but 
prefers not to talk about specifics except to note that law enforcement has 
been involved. I interviewed Pipes shortly before Christmas, when the 
Egyptians were voting on their new constitution. I started out by saying 
that the number of Muslims in the U.S. has doubled since the 9/11 attacks. 
DP: My career divides in two: before and after 9/11. In the first part I was 
trying to show that Islam is relevant to political concerns. If you want to 
understand Muslims, I argued, you need to understand the role of Islam in 
their lives. Now that seems obvious. If anything, there's a tendency to 
over-emphasize Islam; to assume that Muslims are dominated by the 
Koran and are its automatons—which goes too far. You can't just read the 
Koran to understand Muslim life. You have to look at history, at 
personalities, at economics, and so on. 
TB: Do you see the revival of Islam as a reality? 
DP: Yes. Half a century ago Islam was waning, the application of its laws 
became ever more remote, and the sense existed that Islam, like other 
religions, was in decline. Since then there has been a sharp and I think 
indisputable reversal. We're all talking about Islam and its laws now. 
TB: At the same time you have raised an odd question: "Can Islam 
survive Islamism?" Can you explain that? 
DP: I draw a distinction between traditional Islam and Islamism. Islamism 
emerged in its modern form in the 1920s and is driven by a belief that 
Muslims can be strong and rich again if they follow the Islamic law 
severely and in its entirety. This is a response to the trauma of modern 
Islam. And yet this form of Islam is doing deep damage to faith, to the 
point that I wonder if Islam will ever recover. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028746 
TB: Give us the historical context. 
DP: The modern era for Muslims began with Napoleon's invasion of 
Egypt in 1798. Muslims experienced a great shock at seeing how 
advanced the blue-eyed peoples from the north had become. It would be 
roughly analogous to the Eskimos coming down south and decimating 
Westerners, who would uncomprehendingly ask in response, "Who are 
these people and how are they defeating us?" 
TB: So how did they respond? 
DP: Muslims over the past 200 years have made many efforts to figure out 
what went wrong. They have experimented with several answers. One was 
to emulate liberal Europe—Britain and France—until about 1920. Another 
was to emulate illiberal Europe—Germany and Russia—until about 1970. 
The third was to go back to what are imagined to be the sources of Islamic 
strength a millennium ago, namely the application of Islamic law. That's 
Islamism. It's a modern phenomenon, and it's making Muslims the center 
of world unrest. 
TB: But it is also creating discomfort? 
DP: It has terribly deleterious effects on Muslims. Many of them are put 
off by Islam. In Iran, for example, one finds a lot of alienation from Islam 
as a result of the Islamist rule of the last 30-odd years. 
TB: Has it happened anywhere else? 
DP: One hears reports, especially from Algeria and Iraq, of Muslims 
converting to Christianity. And in an unprecedented move, ex-Muslims 
living in the West have organized with the goal of becoming a political 
force. I believe the first such effort was the Centraal Comite voor Ex-
moslims in the Netherlands, but now it's all over the place. 
TB: Nonetheless, Islam has lasted for 1,500 years. 
DP: Yes, but modern Islamism has been around only since the 1920s, and 
I predict it will not last as a world-threatening force for more than a few 
decades. Will Muslims leave the faith or simply stop practicing it? These 
are the sort of questions I expect to be current before long. 
TB: What about Islam in the United States? 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028747 
DP: In the long term, the United States could greatly benefit Islam by 
uniquely freeing the religion from government constraints and permitting 
it to evolve in a positive, modern direction. But that's the long term. Right 
now, American Muslims labor under Saudi and other influences, their 
institutions are extreme, and things are heading in a destructive direction. 
It's also distressing to see how non-Muslim individuals and institutions, 
particularly those on the left, indulge Islamist misbehavior. 
TB: How do they do that? 
DP: Well, turn on the television, go to a class, follow the work of the 
ACLU or the Southern Poverty Law Center, and you will see corporations, 
nonprofits, and government institutions working with the Islamists, 
helping promote the Islamist agenda. The American left and the Islamists 
agree on what they dislike—conservatives—and, despite their profound 
differences, they cooperate. 
TB: Presumably some Muslims here deconvert, right? 
DP: There are some conversions out of Islam, yes. And the Muslim 
establishment in this country is quite concerned about that. But 
numerically it is not a significant number. 
TB: The ones who convert don't talk about it very much? 
DP: In some cases they do; they take advantage of Western freedoms to 
speak their minds. They are the exceptions, though. 
TB: I suspect that the decline of Christianity has encouraged Islam. 
DP: Very much so, as the contrast between Europe and the United States 
reveals. The hard kernel of American Christian faith, not present in 
Europe, means that Islamists are far better behaved in the United States. 
They see the importance of a Christian counterforce. 
TB: Earlier, you mentioned Algeria. It is a big Muslim state that we 
don't hear about today. 
DP: Twenty years ago Algeria was a major focus of attention. That long 
ago ended, although in France coverage is still significant. Algeria is ripe 
for the same kind of upheaval that we have seen in other North African 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028748 
states, such as Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt. I think it is likely to happen 
before too long. 
TB: What about Syria? 
DP: Assad's power is steadily diminishing and I cannot see how his 
regime will remain long in power. 
TB: Should the United States get involved there? 
DP: No, Americans have no dog in this fight and nothing in the U.S. 
Constitution requires us to get involved in every foreign conflict. Two 
wretched forces are killing each other; just look at the ghastly videos of 
the two sides torturing and executing the other. Listen also to what they 
are saying. It's a civil war involving the bad and the worse. I don't want 
the U.S. government involved. That would mean bearing some moral 
responsibility for what emerges, which I expect to be very unsavory. 
TB: So you are supporting the Obama position? 
DP: Yes, though he reaches it with far more angst. Also, there appears to 
be some serious, clandestine U.S. support for the rebel forces. The 
September 11 meeting in Benghazi between the Turkish and the American 
ambassadors was very curious. They are both based in Tripoli, hundreds 
of miles away. What were they doing in Benghazi? Arranging for 
American arms going via Turkey to Syria, it appears. 
TB: How important has Israel been to the revival of Islam? 
DP: It is a major factor in the neighboring states. But elsewhere, in 
Morocco, Iran, Malaysia, it has minor importance. 
TB: Since the "Arab Spring," Israel seems increasingly beleaguered. 
DP: Not really, not yet, though I agree that it will be more beleaguered 
with time. Its neighbors are so consumed with their own affairs that they 
hardly pay Israel attention. But once the neighbors get their houses in 
order, Israel will most likely face new difficulties. 
TB: You have questioned U.S. support for Islamic democracy, which 
does seem naive. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028749 
DP: The U.S. has been the patron for democracy for a century, since 
Wilson's 14 Points, and a wonderful heritage it has been. When an 
American travels the world, he finds himself in country after country 
where his country played a monumentally positive role, especially in 
democratizing the system. We naturally want to extend this to Muslim-
majority countries. Sadly, these for some time have offered an unpleasant 
choice between brutal and greedy dictators or ideological, extreme, and 
antagonistic elected Islamists. It's not a choice we should accept. 
TB: So what should we do? 
DP: I offer three simple guidelines. One, always oppose the Islamists. Like 
fascists and Communists, they are the totalitarian enemy, whether they 
wear long beards in Pakistan or suits in Washington. 
Two, always support the liberal, modern, secular people who share our 
worldview. They look to us for moral and other sustenance; we should be 
true to them. They are not that strong, and cannot take power soon 
anywhere, but they represent hope, offering the Muslim world's only 
prospect of escape from the dreary dichotomy of dictatorship or 
extremism. 
Three, and more difficult, cooperate with dictators but condition it on 
pushing them toward reform and opening up. We need the Mubaraks of 
the world and they need us. Fine, but relentlessly keep the pressure on 
them to improve their rule. Had we begun this process with Abdullah 
Saleh of Yemen in 1978 or with Mubarak in 1981, things could have been 
very different by 2011. But we didn't. 
TB: Egypt might be the test case. 
DP: Well, it's a bit late. Mohammed Morsi is not a greedy dictator but he 
emerged from the Muslim Brotherhood, and his efforts since reaching 
power have been purely Islamist. 
TB: What about the recent elections? 
DP: I do not believe that a single one of the elections and referenda in 
Egypt was fairly conducted. It surprises me that Western governments and 
media are so gullible on this score. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028750 
TB: You could say we were supporting the democracy element in Cairo's 
Tahrir Square. Were we not? 
DP: Yes and rightly so. The initial demonstrations of early 2011 were 
spearheaded by the liberals and seculars who deserve U.S. support. But 
they got quickly pushed aside and Washington barely paid them further 
attention. 
TB: We gave foreign aid to Mubarak. Was that a bad idea? 
DP: That aid dates back to the utterly different circumstances of the 
Egypt-Israel peace treaty of 1979 and became progressively more wrong-
headed. It should long ago have been discontinued. More broadly, I 
believe in aid for emergencies (soup and blankets) and as a bribe, but not 
for economic development. That the Obama administration is 
contemplating aid, including military hardware, to the Morsi government 
outrages me. 
Click here to Reply or Forward 
22.2 GB (10%) of 210.1 GBManage 
©2013 Google - Terms & Privacy 
Last account activity: 0 minutes ago 
Details 
*********************************************************** 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
Jeffrey Epstein 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028751
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #3
================================================================================
Date: 2/14/2013 8:45:53 PM
Subject: 
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tunisia: Tunisia's transition suffered a terrible blow on February 6th when leftist opposition alliance founder and 
head of the Democratic Patriots party Chokri Belaid was shot dead outside his home in Tunis. The event drew 
thousands of protestors to the streets, clamoring against the leading Islamist Ennanda party. The events heighten 
the Islamist-secular divide that has featured in the Tunisian transition and the Arab Spring at large. Tunisian Prime 
Minister Hamadi Jebali described the event as the "assassination of the Tunisian revolution" and promised to 
dissolve the Islamist-led government and form a technocrat government aimed at promoting national unity at this 
divisive time. 
Egypt: The second anniversary of the Egyptian revolution on January 25th was marked less by celebration than it 
was by violence, culminating in a week of unrest that took the lives of more than 50 people. The week was also 
marked by the imposition of a curfew, state of emergency, and large military deployment in the cities of Suez, 
Ismailliya, and Port Said. The events reflect the disillusionment of Egyptians, given the lack of progress on both 
political and economic fronts, while also revealing the state's limitations in restoring order and the rule of law to 
the streets. That the army—the country's most powerful institution—warned of the "collapse of the state" is a 
telling and serious message, conveying the institution's growing frustration with the political impasse. 
The recent violence has also generated serious economic losses and fuel shortages, and caused yet another delay 
with the much-needed IMF loan. It will be interesting to see how the recent violence—as well as the general 
malaise caused by economic woes—affects the Muslim Brotherhood's performance in the upcoming 
parliamentary election (which is yet to be scheduled). A recent report issued by the Brotherhood's political bureau 
hinted that the party's popularity has been in decline. 
Against this backdrop of political and economic turmoil, the 12th summit of the Organization of Islamic 
Cooperation (OIC) convened in Cairo on February 5th with a number of key players in the region in attendance—
among them President Gill of Turkey, Emir Hamad al-Thani of Qatar, and Saudi Crown Prince Salman. The 
summit aimed to discuss Syria, Mali, and the Palestinian issue. The spotlight, however, was on Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad: the first Iranian president to visit Egypt since the 1979 Islamic revolution. 
Libya: On January 31', European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton announced the launch of a two-
year civil mission to help secure Libya's 4,000-kilometer border. The announcement was complemented by a 
surprise visit to Tripoli by David Cameron, who also announced his government's commitment to helping the 
Libyan military and police with training and support. Furthermore, a meeting in Paris the week of February 11th 
will bring together a number of countries to discuss security cooperation and the future of the Libyan legal system. 
These initiatives are a telling manifestation of the urgent need to address security in Libya—especially border 
security—given the Mali crisis, the recent terrorist incident in Algeria, and concerns about security and stability 
across North Africa. 
Jordan: The results of the Jordanian parliamentary election came as no surprise: pro-government candidates 
strengthened their hold, though state television reported that the majority of the 150 seats had been won by 
independents (an indicator that tribal allegiance is becoming a more important factor than party politics). 
According to official figures, 56 percent of the country's 2.3 million registered voters turned out for the ballot, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029689 
with the most obvious absence being that of the Muslim Brotherhood, which protested what it considered to be a 
biased ballot. It remains unclear who will succeed Prime Minister Abdullah Ensur (who submitted his resignation 
to King Abdullah on January 29th), although analysts and commentators consider it likely that a number of 
unexpected appointments will be made in an effort to address the growing malaise. Media reports speculate that 
there are also plans to set up an official channel for communication with the Muslim Brotherhood. Meanwhile, it 
appears that King Abdullah is seeking to bolster ties with regional allies, perhaps for both political and economic 
reasons: the King made visits to Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait from January 29th to February 
4th. 
Syria: Israeli warplanes are generally believed to have struck a convoy en route to Lebanon on January 30th, 
although this has not been confirmed by the government of Israel. The convoy was reported to have been carrying 
sophisticated antiaircraft weaponry to Hezbollah. The attack—carried out on the outskirts of Damascus—was met 
by a sharp threat of retaliation from both the Syrian and Iranian governments: a significant indicator of the regional 
reverberations of the Syrian civil war and the general volatility permeating the region. 
Despite the lack of progress of an international peace initiative spearheaded by Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, 
a new plan by Syrian opposition leader Moaz al-Khatib—comprising a dialogue with President al-Assad based 
on the principle of the regime's departure—offers a glimmer of hope. Upon meeting with al-Khatib on February 
3rd, the foreign ministers of Iran and Russia (the closest allies of the al-Assad regime) seem to have agreed to help 
facilitate this process—an interesting turn of events. The new plan comes as the humanitarian situation continues 
to deteriorate, although some help is foreseen from the $1.5 billion in pledges made at a donors' conference on 
January 30th in Kuwait. 
Israel: While recent elections kept Netanyahu's Likud party in the lead by winning 31 of 120 seats in the Knesset, 
the new centrist party Yesh Atid's ability to win 19 seats under the leadership of Yair Lapid garnered all the 
attention. The results generated media debate about the possibility of a shift in Israeli policy vis-à-vis the 
Palestinians. In fact, the election campaign and its results were centered on domestic and socioeconomic issues, 
and internal reform. Furthermore, Yesh Atid is known to maintain an ambiguous stance on the peace process. 
On January 29th, Israel became the first country to boycott a United Nations review of its human rights practices, 
despite the United States' and other political players' advice to participate. This is a breach of an established 
practice of cooperation and thus represents precedence for noncooperation by other states. It also leaves the 
question of human rights in occupied Palestinian territories outside the jurisdiction of the international 
community. It remains unclear, however, whether the newly elected government will make a pragmatic effort to 
reengage with the UN review effort. 
Bahrain: On January 21st King Hamad al-Khalifa issued a decree endorsing a renewed national dialogue. 
Subsequently, on February 4th, Minister of Justice Khalid bin Ali al-Khalifa announced that the national dialogue 
would resume on February 10th. Press reports indicate willingness by the opposition's to participate in the 
dialogue. 
5 th 
Iran: President Ahmadinejad was warmly welcomed by President Morsi upon arrival in Cairo on February 
and, interestingly, by the Sunni leadership of Al-Azhar. The Iranian leader reciprocated by offering to provide 
Egypt with a "big credit line" to help its lagging economy, a telling indication of Tehran's desire for a 
rapprochement. The reaction on the Egyptian street, however, was generally negative, revealing thedisconnect 
between a dominant Muslim Brotherhood political elite reaching out to an Islamist power and a critical faction of 
Egyptian society hostile to this shift. The meeting is not necessarily an indicator that bilateral ties will improve, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029690 
given Egypt's much-savored relationship with other Gulf countries (not to mention the United States). It does 
represent a re-balancing of relationships in a changing Middle East nonetheless. 
A new round of talks between Iran and the P5+1 (five permanent members of the Security Council plus Germany) 
has now been scheduled to take place on February 26th following weeks of conflicting reports and what seemed 
to be a diplomatic stalemate. This represents the first effort at talks at the political directors' level since the 
Moscow meeting in June of 2012. While the talks are restarting just over a month after the start of US President 
Obama's second term, Iran appears to have moved into its political season: tensions between President 
Ahmadinejad and the speaker of the Majlis, Larjani, have gone public with mutual recriminations about corrupt 
family members and associates. 
Saudi Arabia: Former intelligence chief Prince Muqrin bin Abdulaziz was appointed second deputy prime minister of Saudi 
Arabia on February rd, a role traditionally associated with the incumbent being second in line to become king. Prince 
Muqrin is the youngest son of the kingdom's founder. 
Yemen: A UN Security Council delegation visited Yemen on January 27th in a show of support to President Hadi 
and Yemen's political transition. The visit reflects the Security Council's interest in seeing Yemen move forward 
with the National Dialogue Conference. During the visit there were large demonstrations, as thousands demanded 
a fair and just approach in dealing with former president Ali Abdullah Saleh, who has received immunity under 
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative. 
--
*********************************************************** 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
Jeffrey Epstein 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029691
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #4
================================================================================
Date: 2/15/2013 4:52:58 PM
Subject: 
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
take-it-or-leave-it deal by the U.S. on the 
nuclear issue is the wrong strategy  
Ray Takeyh 
February 14, 2013 -- On Feb. 26, the United States and Iran will once 
more resume their diplomatic ritual, in the so-called six-party talks, over 
Iran's disputed nuclear program. As the two perennial adversaries eye one 
another, there are competing paradigms about how to deal with Tehran. 
An emerging school of thought suggests that the best means of "testing" 
Iran is to offer it a final nuclear agreement that presumably promises 
measurable relief from sanctions for significant Iranian concessions. Iran's 
failure to grasp such an offer would then conclusively demonstrate to both 
domestic and international audiences that the cause of the impasse is not 
American belligerence but Iranian truculence. 
But this approach fails to recognize that an arms-control process is 
necessarily an incremental one, nor does it offer a practical substitute to 
the existing step-by-step diplomacy. 
Iran's nuclear program encompasses a vast complex of enrichment 
facilities, centrifuge construction plants, uranium extraction companies 
and thousands of scientists working in university and government 
laboratories. Iran is enriching uranium at both 5% and 20% levels, 
experimenting with high-velocity centrifuges and seemingly in the process 
of constructing additional enrichment facilities. 
Such a multilayered, multifaceted program can be dealt with only on a 
piecemeal basis, as the technical details and rules for inspections are too 
complex to be addressed in a single agreement. 
Moreover, should the United States offer Iran a final deal, Tehran still has 
a right to contest and negotiate its provisions and offer counterproposals. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018197 
The international community is unlikely to concede to either more 
sanctions or the use of force until Iran's objections are taken into full 
consideration. As such, a grand deal that is supposed to provoke a moment 
of clarity is likely to be enmeshed in the existing, protracted arms-control 
process. 
Another complication is the advent of public opinion and critical 
constituencies in Iran devoted to the perpetuation of the program. The 
growing public sentiment is that Iran has a right to acquire a nuclear 
capability. As the program matures, it is becoming a source of pride for a 
citizenry accustomed to the revolution's setbacks and failures. 
Also emerging is a bureaucratic and scientific establishment with its own 
parochial considerations for sustaining the nuclear investment. A clerical 
leadership that is dealing with a restive population and empowered 
security services cannot easily dispense with its nuclear trump card. 
All this suggests that the best means of addressing Iran's nuclear challenge 
is to mitigate its most dangerous dimensions. The focus should remain on 
Iran's high-grade enrichment and its underground nuclear facility nestled 
in mountains outside Qom. Tehran seems to have conceived an ingenious 
path to nuclear advancement, one that involves increasing the size and 
sophistication of its civilian atomic apparatus to the point where it can 
quickly surge into a bomb. While staying within the rules of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency's inspection process, Iran is 
essentially expanding its capabilities while shielding them under the 
veneer of legality. Given the fact that much of civilian nuclear technology 
can easily be misappropriated for military purposes, Iran can construct an 
elaborate nuclear infrastructure while remaining within IAEA guidelines. 
The diplomatic challenge is to derail this path to a nuclear weapon by 
imposing significant restraints on its program. And this can still be done 
through a process that proceeds incrementally and sequentially. 
U.S. officials would be wise to get out of the crisis mode and put some 
time back on the clock. The Iran issue always seems urgent, and yet 
somehow there is always time to deal with it. Washington should 
acknowledge the obvious, namely, that given Iran's gradualist approach, it 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018198 
is still years from completing an efficient enrichment infrastructure, 
constructing a nuclear arsenal and developing a reliable means of delivery. 
By agreeing to a compressed timeline, the U.S. only narrows its options 
and makes a solution even more elusive. 
As the United States again contemplates its Iran conundrum, it should 
eschew calls for a take-it-or-leave-it deal. The history of Iran's 
confrontation with the international community suggests that keeping it a 
crisis situation benefits the Islamic Republic. Ironically, it is the Western 
powers that have generated alarmist conditions. And then to escape the 
predicament of their own making, they offer Iran more concessions and 
further incentives. 
To avoid a repeat of that outcome, it would be prudent to have a sense of 
proportionality and appreciate that, in the end, time works best for the 
United States and not the economically beleaguered theocracy. 
Ray Takeyh is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. 
Article 2. 
The Guardian  
Whether it's North Korea or Iran, sanctions  
won't work  
Simon Jenkins 
13 February 2013 -- Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinej ad. 'Threats 
and sanctions have not weakened the regime's determination to proceed 
[with nuclear weapons], but rather weakened opposition to it'. Photograph: 
Sven Hoppe/EPA 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018199 
North Korea has  set off a third nuclear test explosion. It has done so in 
defiance of the UN, America, Japan and even, reportedly, its sponsor, 
China. It has said to hell with everyone, in a brutal comment on western 
economic sanctions. 
The UN security council met yesterday and Washington threatened 
"significant consequences" — code nowadays for "tighter sanctions". Every 
shred of evidence suggests that these will not achieve the declared goal. 
They will merely add to the impoverishment of North Korea's people by 
its own government. Sanctions are the most counter-productive tool 
known to diplomacy. Yet we keep imposing them. Why? 
Sanctions assume that all countries react to external pressure as might a 
capitalist democracy. They assume a misguided regime will change its 
mind and put financial advantage above its definition of national interest. 
"Smart sanctions" (really dumb sanctions) further assume the rich can be 
punished without punishing the poor, and that all dictators' wives want to 
fly abroad and shop at Harrods. They assume that trade guides political 
action and political action trumps dictatorship. 
Economic sanctions are hugely popular to western politicians, not because 
of their effect but because of their cause: the desire to stand on an 
international stage and being seen to "do something". They are the least-
cost first resort of the laptop bombardiers of global intervention. They 
sound punitive and aggressive without inflicting any hardship on the 
imposer. 
After North Korea the other target in the sanctions frame is Iran. 
Everything at present suggests that ever-tighter sanctions have done 
nothing to curb Iran's nuclear programme. Indeed, by inducing paranoia, 
probably the reverse. Sanctions have certainly "bitten", to the glee of their 
advocates. They have brought inflation and a collapse in the currency, the 
rial. They have harmed ordinary people and solidified sentiment against 
the west and the "great Satan" of the US. Assassination and cyber-
weapons have wiped out a few scientists and scrambled a few computers. 
What sanctions have not done is weakened the power of the ayatollahs or 
their private army, the Revolutionary Guards. Both seem as secure as ever, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018200 
while (relatively) moderate civilian politicians are reduced to feuding and 
arresting each others' children. Iran's nuclear programme appears to 
proceed independent even of the organs of its own state. 
A spoof article in the Economist last year portrayed Iran's supreme leader, 
Ayatollah Khamenei, ruminating on western nations' obsessive posturing 
towards his country. He mused that these were unstable, unreliable places, 
dangerous though probably not all mad. But since it was hard to be sure, "I 
would feel a lot safer if we already had that bomb". Similar insecurity 
drove sanctioned Cuba to accept Russian missiles in the 1960s, and 
sanctioned Iraq and Libya to pretend to build weapons of mass destruction 
in the 1990s. 
Sanctions never stop bad things happening. Rather they entrench dictators, 
build up siege economies and debilitate the urban middle class from which 
opposition to dictatorship grows. As Khamenei said in a speech a year  
ago, sanctions were "painful ... but make us more self-reliant". Indeed, for 
a regime to be sanctioned is to receive an elixir: witness Castro, Gaddafi, 
the ayatollahs and the ruling cliques of Burma, Afghanistan and North 
Korea. That sanctioned regimes sometimes come to an end is not proof 
that sanctions work, rather that they take a long time and usually require 
war to "work". 
This is a rarely researched topic because sanctions are diplomatic ideology 
rather than science. A debate in 1998 in International Security magazine  
saw the Chicago academic, Robert Pape, barely challenged in his view 
that only around five of the 115 cases of sanctions imposed since the war 
could claim any plausible efficacy. Most merely inflicted "significant 
human costs on the populations of target states, including on innocent 
civilians who have little influence on their government's behaviour". They 
are a ready invitation to war. 
When I was reporting on South Africa in the 1980s I became convinced 
that sanctions were aiding import substitution and benefiting the Afrikaner 
economy, probably giving apartheid an extra decade of life. They likewise 
prolonged Ian Smith's regime in Rhodesia. Sanctions made Libya's 
Gaddafi so rich he could spoon money into the London School of 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018201 
Economics. They made Saddam Hussein one of the 10 wealthiest people 
in the world. Besides, sanctions create sanctions-busting which, like drugs, 
is a global criminal industry born entirely of the idiocy of western 
diplomacy. 
A year ago the  Foreign Office defended yet another round of sanctions  
against Tehran on the grounds they would "hasten Iran's economic 
collapse and deepen rifts within the regime, in the hope that saner voices 
will deem the price of pursuing nuclear weapons too high". Economies 
don't collapse, any more than poverty changes governments. Even Greece, 
now the most "sanctioned" nation in Europe, has not collapsed. Places just 
get poorer. As for "saner voices", they go into exile, hiding or prison. 
That's where sanctions send them. 
Iran is a proud nation of 80 million mostly Muslim people, one of many 
Asian and African states struggling between theocracy and democracy, 
tradition and modernity. These are agonising struggles among and within 
peoples, to which the west has contributed nothing but hostility and 
belligerence. Under the cloak of "counter-terror", it has been as crass as it 
was during the Crusades. Of course no one wants to see nuclear weapons 
spread. Russia tried to stop China getting them. China tried to stop North 
Korea. The west tried to stop India and Pakistan, while hypocritically 
tolerating Israel and the replenished arsenals of France and Britain. No 
pressure made the slightest difference to anyone. 
If Iran really wants a nuclear weapon, it will get one — the more so when it 
is threatened with dire retribution if it does. That is how such states react 
to pressure. Ever since the dodgy election of 2009, threats and sanctions 
have not weakened the regime's determination to proceed, but rather 
weakened opposition to it. If ever there was a country unlikely to respond 
to diplomatic bullying, it is Iran. If ever there was a country that might 
respond to constructive engagement, to commercial, governmental and 
cultural intercourse, it is also Iran. Why the west should want to make it 
another North Korea passes comprehension. 
Article 3. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018202 
The Washington Institute 
Year of Decision: U.S. Policy toward Iran in  
2013 
James F. Jeffrey and Thomas Pickering  
February 12, 2013 -- On February 7, 2013, James F. Jeffrey and Thomas 
Pickering addressed a Policy Forum at The Washington Institute. 
Ambassador Jeffrey, a former assistant to the president and deputy 
national security advisor, is author of the new Institute study Moving to  
Decision: U.S. Policy toward Iran. Ambassador Pickering served in 
numerous key posts at home and abroad over a five-decade career, 
including undersecretary of state for political affairs. The following is a 
rapporteur's summary of their remarks. 
JAMES F. JEFFREY 
The move to decision on Iran is the most pressing and dangerous issue on 
the U.S. and international agenda in 2013. The year ahead will largely 
define the longstanding struggle between Washington and Tehran, and the 
considerable stakes involved make it absolutely crucial that a swift and 
decisive resolution be achieved. Regardless of the outcome of the nuclear 
issue, however, Iran will continue to present a long-term challenge to the 
United States because of clashing ideologies, conflicting foreign policy 
goals, and Iran's claim to regional hegemony. 
There are four likely outcomes to the nuclear issue: a unilateral Iranian 
decision to halt or dramatically slow its progress toward a nuclear weapon; 
a negotiated outcome, whether through the P5+1 (i.e., the five permanent 
members of the UN Security Council plus Germany) or bilateral 
negotiations; a military strike, as threatened by President Obama and 
Israeli prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu, and an explicit or implicit 
shift to containment, indicating that Washington would be prepared to 
coexist with a nuclear-armed Iran. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018203 
The most effective resolution would be a negotiated outcome -- to achieve 
it, Washington will need to take preliminary steps on several fronts. A 
serious compromise needs to be put on the table, including an offer to 
suspend crippling oil sanctions in return for specific, verifiable Iranian 
steps to eliminate any nuclear breakout capabilities. Equally significant is 
establishing a credible military threat, given that Tehran has been willing 
to endure increasing economic pressure in order to continue its nuclear 
program. The regime is unlikely to concede anything during negotiations 
if it does not believe that Washington will actually follow through on such 
threats. Although specific public redlines are often unpalatable, the Obama 
administration must clarify internally when it would take military steps, 
and these intentions must be made clear to the Iranians. 
In the same vein, the military option requires a credible negotiating 
complement, as seen in the early 1990s with Iraq. To legitimize military 
action against Saddam Hussein's regime, Washington had to prove that all 
other options had been exhausted. Similarly, the only way to set the 
predicate for military action against Iran is to show the regime and the 
international community that everything has been tried, and that 
Washington has left Tehran with a way out. Failure to do so would 
undermine the legitimacy of any strikes. 
It is also important to understand that curtailing Iran's nuclear progress 
will not by itself alter the regime's regional agenda -- nuclear ambitions 
are but an extension of Tehran's wider aspirations toward hegemony in the 
Middle East. Unfortunately, none of the longer-term proposals for 
addressing that issue seem feasible at the moment (e.g., regime change by 
internal or external means; a shift in Tehran's views on the Supreme 
Leader and succession; a "grand deal" between Washington, Iran, and the 
international community). 
One lesson to be learned from past interactions with Tehran (or lack 
thereof) is that when the United States proactively opposes Iranian 
aggression in the Middle East, the regime relents, but when Washington 
offers a more passive response, Iranian aggression increases. With respect 
to Syria, for example, it cannot be assumed that Bashar al-Assad will fall 
at all, let alone quickly, without active U.S. engagement. If the Assad 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018204 
regime does in fact survive, Iran would become increasingly emboldened, 
with potentially disastrous consequences for the United States and its 
allies and interests in the Middle East. 
Denuding U.S. forces in the region to enable a pivot to Asia is also risky. 
Nowhere else in the world is America more likely to deploy forces than in 
the Persian Gulf in opposition to Iran, and nowhere else is it of utmost 
importance that any potential confrontation be won decisively in the next 
five to ten years than with the Islamic Republic. 
Going forward, Washington must discriminate between Iranian behaviors 
it considers unacceptable -- such as support for terrorism, hegemonic 
ambitions, and progress toward nuclear weapons -- and those it can 
tolerate. U.S. officials could open the door for negotiations by making 
clear to Tehran that they do not seek regime change; the first step in that 
regard would be to let Iran know that Washington respects it as a nation-
state and not a transnational revolutionary movement. 
Finally, disorganization within the U.S. government and a "go it alone" 
mentality have accounted for many of Washington's internal difficulties in 
responding to the Iranian challenge. To alleviate this problem, all cabinet-
level officials must be in constant and complete coordination, devoid of 
routine bureaucratic obstacles. In addition, the appointment of a senior 
subcabinet official whose sole responsibility is Iran (or, alternatively, a 
small group of officials in constant coordination) could allow the 
administration to reorganize bureaucratically in preparation for this year of 
decision. 
THOMAS PICKERING 
Discussions of containment policy typically imply accepting the Islamic 
Republic as an inevitable nuclear power and using deterrence to deal with 
a nuclear-armed Iran. Yet such an outcome would be disastrous for U.S. 
nonproliferation policy, which is based on the notion that fewer nuclear 
states means less chance of miscalculated use. If Iran attains a nuclear 
weapon, other regional powers would likely follow suit -- clearly an 
undesirable outcome for the international community. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018205 
At the other end of the spectrum, using military means in the short term to 
guarantee prevention would entail a vast use of force -- essentially an 
unofficial, semipermanent occupation of Iran. This is not a viable path, 
particularly since other diplomatic possibilities have not yet been 
exhausted. 
Similarly, sanctions, while effective, are not sufficient by themselves. 
They must be intertwined with negotiations -- as Washington and its allies 
increase the pressure, cohesive and meaningful talks with equivalent 
concessions should follow suit. Some have argued that negotiations should 
expand to a "big for big" format, but decades of mistrust between the 
United States and Iran make smaller deals more practical. Such an 
approach would have to focus on ending Iran's most problematic 
enrichment activity: processing uranium to the 20 percent threshold, which 
makes the leap to weapons-grade material much easier. Instead, the regime 
could limit itself to 5 percent enrichment, and under strict supervision by 
the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
The intelligence community widely believes that although Iran has not yet 
decided to make a nuclear weapon, it is still moving to acquire all the 
necessary capabilities in case it chooses that path. Accordingly, 
Washington will need to obtain a concrete Iranian commitment to convert 
its stocks of readily upgradeable gaseous uranium into metallic fuel 
elements, which pose significantly less of a threat. A serious inspection 
system would need to be implemented in order to monitor these 
requirements. In return, the Iranians would expect the lifting of nuclear-
related sanctions. They would also likely ask for acknowledgement that 
they have the right to continue their civil enrichment program, whether for 
supposed use in cancer treatment or to safeguard against a potential 
Russian decision to cease fueling the Bushehr reactor. 
Thus far, President Obama has been frustrated at the lack of progress in 
response to his openness toward the Iranian regime, and his new cabinet 
has an obligation to help him solidify a negotiating position that improves 
the situation. If the Iranians continue to reject U.S. positions that 
seemingly respond to some of their demands, then the administration 
should begin applying other pressures. These steps should be taken sooner 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018206 
rather than later so that the parties can move toward a mutually acceptable 
conclusion. 
Washington must also keep in mind that Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei 
has the last word on all matters in Iran, and that negotiations will go only 
as far as he allows them to go. In years past, he issued a fatwa condemning 
nuclear weapons -- Washington could take advantage of this fact by 
drafting a UN Security Council resolution endorsing the fatwa. This could 
be a small step toward boosting Khamenei's international profile while 
simultaneously pressuring Iran to follow its own religious decree. 
To be sure, regime change remains an attractive alternative on paper, and 
some in Washington view it as an insurance policy. Historically, however, 
regime change has not been a successful option for the United States, and 
internal attempts at toppling Iran's leadership have thus far been crushed 
by Stalinesque suppression, including the 2009 uprising. Despite such 
failures and Washington's limited influence in Iranian domestic affairs, 
U.S. policy should be to demonstratively support popular democratic 
movements. 
Article 4. 
TIME 
Spy Fail: Why Iran Is Losing Its Covert War  
with Israel  
Karl Vick 
Feb. 13, 2013 -- Slumped in a Nairobi courtroom, suit coats rumpled and 
reading glasses dangling from librarian chains, the defendants made a poor 
showing for the notorious Quds Force of the elite Iranian Revolutionary 
Guard Corps. Ahmad Abolafathi Mohammed and Sayed Mansour Mousa 
had been caught red-handed and middle-aged. And if the latter did them a 
certain credit — blandly forgettable always having been a good look for a 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018207 
secret agent — the prisoners still had to explain why they had hidden 15 
kg of the military explosive RDX under bushes on a Mombasa golf 
course. 
Created to advance Iran's interests clandestinely overseas, the Quds Force 
has lately provided mostly embarrassment, stumbling in Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, India, Kenya and most spectacularly in Thailand, where before 
accidentally blowing up their Bangkok safe house, Iran's secret agents  
were photographed in the sex-tourism mecca of Pattaya, one arm around a 
hookah, the other around a hooker. In its ongoing shadow war with Israel, 
the Iranian side's lone "success" was the July 18 bombing of a Bulgarian 
bus carrying Israeli tourists — though European investigators last week 
officially attributed that attack to Iran's Lebanese proxy, Hizballah. That 
leaves the Islamic Republic itself with a failure rate hovering near 100% 
abroad and an operational tempo — nine overseas plots uncovered in nine 
months — that carries a whiff of desperation. A Tehran government long 
branded by U.S. officials as the globe's leading exporter of terrorism may 
be cornering the market on haplessness. 
Within Iran's own borders, however, the story is different. Twice in the 
past two years Iranian intelligence has cracked espionage rings working 
with Israel's Mossad, Western intelligence officials tell TIME. In both 
cases, the arrests were the furthest thing from secret: announced at a news 
conference, each was later followed up by televised confessions broadcast 
on Iranian state television in prime time. Given Iran's history of trumped-
up confessions, skepticism is more than justified. But the arrests appear to 
be solid. One intelligence official said the captured Iranians provided 
"support and logistics" to the Mossad operatives who carried out the 
assassinations of Iranian nuclear scientists. 
At least four scientists were killed on Tehran's streets from 2010 to 2012, 
when, as TIME has reported, Israel ratcheted back on covert operations 
inside Iran. Officially, Israel has remained silent on the killings, though 
government officials will coyly say they welcome the deaths. The Jewish 
state maintains the same ambiguous posture on other "setbacks" to Iran's 
nuclear program widely — and correctly, Western intelligence officials 
say — attributed to Mossad, from the Stuxnet computer virus, to 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018208 
mysterious explosions like the massive blast at a missile base, which 
destroyed ballistic missiles that could reach Israel. 
The covert onslaught dovetails with Israel's history of reaching "over the 
horizon" to disarm perceived threats at a distance. To keep advanced arms 
from reaching Hamas and Hizballah, Israel in the past year sent warplanes 
to bomb convoys and arms depots in Sudan and Syria, respectively, 
without apparent retribution. In the case of Iran, however, experts say the 
audacity of Israel's covert campaign stirred Tehran to revive an espionage 
effort that lay largely fallow since 9/11. The Spy vs. Spy contest that 
ensued would prove woefully one-sided, even in the third-world countries 
where Iran chose to strike, hoping to avoid heightened security awareness 
in the developed world. In the end, its only success came inside Iran, 
where the secret police operate without inhibition. 
The shadow war may have started on Jan. 15, 2007, the day Ardeshir 
Hosseinpour passed away. Hosseinpour was a specialist in 
electromagnetics at the Nuclear Technology Center in the city of Isfahan, 
Iran, but his death might have escaped notice had Iran's government not 
kept it under wraps for almost a week, finally attributing it to fumes from 
a faulty heater. An online report by the American private intelligence firm 
Stratfor suggested another cause — radioactive poisoning — and hinted 
that Mossad's Caesarea section was back in business. Caesarea, named for 
an Israeli beach town that dates back to Roman times, is the operations 
branch of Israel's secret service, most notoriously responsible for the 
assassinations of some two dozen Palestinians (and an innocent waiter) 
after the 1972 Munich Olympics. Assassinations are carried out by a very 
small unit dubbed Kidon, the Hebrew word for "tip of the spear." Kidon 
operates at a remove from the legions of Mossad employees working in 
less lethal fields. 
It would have been a unit called Hatzomet, or "The Junction," that 
recruited Majid Fashi, a handsome young Iranian who dropped out of high 
school to pursue a career in kickboxing. By the account he gave on Iranian 
state television early in 2011, Fashi presented himself at the Israeli 
consulate in Istanbul in 2007 and was vetted for a solid year before being 
shown any trust. Two years later, on Jan. 12, 2010, he would place a bomb 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018209 
on a motorbike parked on the sidewalk outside the Tehran home of 
Masoud Alimohammadi, the nuclear physicist was killed when it was 
detonated by remote control. 
In the broadcast, Fashi accurately described the Mossad campus north of 
Tel Aviv. He said he had been given a laptop equipped with a second 
operating system and used it to communicate through online drop boxes. 
He was impressed by his handlers' thoroughness. At one point Fashi 
described studying a scale model of Alimohammadi's street. "It was an 
exact copy of the real one," Fashi said. "The tree next it, the street curb, 
the bridge." In a later broadcast, he was seated across from 
Alimohammadi's widow, who glared at him as he bowed his head and 
wept. Mossad officials were "pissed off and shocked" seeing their agent 
on television, the intelligence official said. 
Fashi was executed in May 2012. About the same time, Iran's intelligence 
minister announced the arrest of 14 more Iranians, eight men and six 
women dubbed members of the "Terror Club" in the subsequent  prime-
time broadcast of that name. Filmed in shadow, and rich in atmospherics, 
the Aug. 5 program recreated Alimohammadi's death and four subsequent 
attacks: they started with the Nov. 29, 2010 nearly simultaneous attempts 
on Majid Shariari and Fereydoun Abbasi, nuclear scientists driving to 
work when magnetic "sticky bombs" were attached to the side of their cars 
from passing motorcycles. Abbasi managed to escape before it detonated, 
saving his wife as well. Shariari was killed — a significant setback for the 
Iranian nuclear program where he was the top scientist, according to a 
Western intelligence official. 
The confessed agents offered absorbing detail — they were aboard a Bajaj 
Pulsar, wearing helmets, when the magnet bomb stuck on the right front 
panel of Shariari's car exploded. The riders scrambled into the "trail car" 
assigned to follow the target and disappeared into the traffic of the Imam 
Ali Autobahn. Already gone was the car assigned to cut off and slow the 
car carrying the scientist. They claimed to have rehearsed on a practice 
track inside Israel. None of the details could be confirmed, but an 
intelligence official acknowledged: "Another network was taken." 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018210 
The third scientist, Dariush Rezaeinejad was shot on July 23, 2011 after 
picking up his child at a day care; his wife described hearing shots whiz by 
as she chased the assailants. The most recent assassination was the Jan. 11, 
2012 death of Mustafa Ahmadi-Roshan, an expert on uranium enrichment, 
also by a magnet bomb slapped on his car during his morning commute. 
By then, Iran was trying to strike back. The task of avenging the scientists 
fell to the sprawling Quds Force's own covert-operations division, known 
as Unit 400. It took a shotgun approach, targeting Israeli diplomatic 
missions in a variety of countries, mostly in the developing world where 
the global antiterrorism mesh is not so fine. Exposed in Baku, Tbilisi, 
Johannesburg, Mombasa and Bangkok, the failures mounted at a pace that 
was itself one of the problems. In the world of espionage, a quality covert 
operation can take years to pull together. Yet in the 15 months from May 
2011 to July 2012, the Quds Force and Hizballah attempted 20 attacks, by 
the count of Matthew Levitt, a former State Department counterterrorism 
official. "Hizballah and the Quds Force traded speed for tradecraft and 
reaped what they sowed," Levitt writes in a January report for the 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Quds Force planners were 
stretched thin by the rapid tempo of their new attack plan, and were forced 
to throw together random teams of operatives who had not trained 
together." 
The decline in quality was so striking it initially inspired disbelief Recall 
the preposterous-sounding plot weaving together a former used-car 
salesman, Mexico's Zetas drug gang and a bank transfer from a 
Revolutionary Guard account to assassinate Saudi Arabia's ambassador — 
by bombing a Washington restaurant? A year on it looks like the new 
normal. In Bangkok last month, an Iranian agent entered a courtroom in a 
wheelchair, having accidentally blown his legs off while fleeing police. A 
January alert issued by Turkish intelligence was light on specifics but 
quite certain the Quds operatives would be staying in five-star hotels. 
"There's a number of reasons that Iranian intelligence has suffered," says 
Meir Javedanfar, an Iranian-born analyst who lectures at the 
Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, Israel. "No. 1," he says, "is the 2009 
uprisings in Iran." The street protests over a fraudulent election 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018211 
undermined the perceived legitimacy of the state among people who once 
would work for it, including in its secret services. "People less and less see 
it as a nationalist endeavor and more as a Khamenei-related project to 
strengthen himself," Javedanfar says, referring to Iran's Supreme Leader 
Ayatullah Ali Khamenei, who by some published accounts personally 
authorizes all overseas attacks. 
Hard-liners further aggravated the situation by purging competent 
reformists from both the secret services and from Iran's embassies — 
crucial to a force expected to work undetected abroad. "Basically the Quds 
Force doesn't cooperate with the Foreign Ministry, and the Foreign 
Ministry isn't what it used to be either," says Javedanfar. Under President 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, 42% of ministry employees have only high 
school degrees. "The regime is a bigger threat to itself than Israel," he 
says. 
Karl Vick has been TIME's Jerusalem bureau chief since 2010, covering 
Israel, the Palestine territories and nearby sovereignties. He worked 16 
years at the Washington Post in Nairobi, Istanbul, Baghdad, Los Angeles 
and Rockville, MD. 
Article 5. 
YaleGlobal 
Is the US Ready To Be Number Two?  
Kishore Mahbubani 
11 February 2013 -- SINGAPORE: Long before anyone did, former US 
president Bill Clinton saw that America would have to prepare for the time 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018212 
when it would no longer be the number one power in the world. In his 
2003 Yale University address on "Global Challenges," he said: 
If you believe that maintaining power and control and absolute freedom of 
movement and sovereignty is important to your country's future, there's 
nothing inconsistent in that [the US continuing to behaving unilaterally]. 
[The US is] the biggest, most powerful country in the world now. . . . But 
if you believe that we should be trying to create a world with rules and 
partnerships and habits of behavior that we would like to live in when 
we're no longer the military political economic superpower in the world, 
then you wouldn't do that. It just depends on what you believe. 
Long before 2003, Clinton wanted to begin preparing Americans for this 
new world. "Clinton believed [...] what we had in the wake of the cold 
war was a multilateral moment — an opportunity to shape the world 
through our active leadership of the institutions Clinton admired and 
[Charles] Krauthammer disdained," writes Strobe Talbott, former deputy 
secretary of state in his book The Great Experiment: The Story of Ancient 
Empires, Modern States, and the Quest for a Global Nation. "But Clinton 
kept that belief largely to himself while he was in office.... political 
instincts told him it would be inviting trouble to suggest that the sun 
would someday set on American preeminence." Sadly, few Americans 
have heeded Clinton's wisdom. Few dare to mention that America could 
well be number two. I discovered this when I chaired a panel on "the 
future of American power" at the 2012 World Economic Forum in Davos. 
After citing projections that America would have the second largest 
economy in just a few years, I asked the American panelists — two 
senators, a congresswoman and a former deputy national security advisor 
— whether Americans are ready to become number two. To my shock, 
none could acknowledge publically this possibility. 
America may well become number two faster than anyone has anticipated. 
According to the most recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
projections, China will have larger share of global GDP than the United 
States by 2017. In 1980, in PPP terms, the US share of the global economy 
was 25 percent, while China's was 2.2 percent. By 2017, the US share will 
decline to 17.9 percent, and China's will rise to 18.3 percent. Even if 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018213 
America becomes number two, we will still have a better world. In many 
ways, the world is "converging" to American values and standards, as I 
explain in The Great Convergence. The global middle class is booming, 
interstate war is waning, and never before have people traveled and 
communicated across the world so easily. These changes are creating 
common values and norms across the world. Education and scientific 
reasoning, for example, are enabling people the world over to speak with a 
common language. However, while humanity is well on its way to 
combating absolute poverty and interstate warfare, other problems are 
surfacing. Preventing and curtailing transnational issues like climate 
change, human and drug trafficking, and financial crises require 
cooperation among nation states, yet this is not happening. A simple 
analogy illustrates this. Before the era of modern globalization, 
humankind was like a flotilla of more than 100 separate boats in their 
separate countries. The world needed a set of rules then to ensure that the 
many boats did not collide and facilitate their cooperation on the high seas 
if they chose to do so. The 1945 rules-based order strived to do this, and 
despite some obvious failures, it succeeded in producing a relatively stable 
global order for more than 50 years. Today, the 7 billion people who 
inhabit planet earth no longer live in more than 100 separate boats. 
Instead, they live in 193 separate cabins on the same boat. But this boat 
has a problem. It has 193 captains and crews, each claiming exclusive 
responsibility for one cabin. No captain or crew cares for the boat as a 
whole. The world is now sailing into increasingly turbulent waters with no 
captain or crew at the helm. The Great Convergence echoes the themes 
of Clinton's 2003 Yale speech. It's in the interest of all — particularly great 
powers — to strengthen institutions of global governance so that we're not 
sailing blindly into choppy waters without a captain. The National 
Intelligence Council recently projected that in 2030 Asia would overtake 
the Western world economically, technologically and militarily. When 
China becomes a world superpower in a matter of decades, the United 
States and Europe will want to ensure that China plays by the rules. 
But in order to make international organizations like the United Nations, 
the IMF and the World Bank more credible and effective, they must 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018214 
undergo serious reform. It is manifestly absurd that the West makes up 12 
percent of the world's population but takes up 60 percent of UN Security 
Council permanent seats. It's nonsensical that the head of the IMF is 
always a European and the head of the World Bank is always an American 
as the West's share of global GDP diminishes every year. This 
concentration of clout in the hands of a relative few has grave implications 
for these institutions' effectiveness and independence, making them 
instruments of the West. No other organization, not even huge global 
NGOs like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation or the Clinton 
Foundation, has the scope and legitimacy that the UN currently enjoys. 
For example, the United States for years has been trying to pressure China 
to take a more proactive role in fighting climate change. Predictably, 
China has resisted these pressures because they saw them as a clever yet 
transparent American ruse to curtail Chinese economic growth. Only when 
the United Nations Development Programme raised the issue with China 
did the Chinese government take heed, as the UNDP is seen as a neutral 
party in China. The UN and its many agencies may soon lose invaluable 
credibility if the West insists on monopolizing its power over these 
institutions. 
Any reform of the UN should take into account three principles: 
democracy, recognition of power balances and the rule of law. Institutions 
of global governance can be made more democratic by ensuring that their 
leadership accurately reflects the composition of world's population. At 
the same time, we must also take into account geopolitical relationships 
among emerging and middle powers. Finally, the rule of law is essential to 
the mediation and resolution of thorny international issues and to 
governing the conduct of states on the international stage so as to prevent 
escalation of conflict. 
In this rapidly changing world, it's a mistake to allow institutions of global 
governance to stay as they are. The 1945 rules-based order is no longer 
appropriate for 21st century circumstances. Global leaders must better 
prepare us for the challenges to come and equip our international 
organizations to deal with them. Leaders must find the courage to continue 
advocating for stronger multilateral cooperation. It is time for our captains 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018215 
and crews to emerge from their cabins and start steering the boat. 
Kishore Mahbubani is dean of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, 
NUS, and author of the forthcoming book The Great Convergence: Asia, 
the West, and the Logic of One World. 
Article 6. 
Foreign affairs 
Pyongyang's Nuclear Logic  
Jennifer Lind, Keir A. Lieber, and Daryl G. Press 
February 14, 2013 -- In his State of the Union address, U.S. President 
Barack Obama described North Korea's recent nuclear test as a 
provocation that required a firm response. The intended audience for that 
provocation, though, is up for debate. Some commentators have posited 
that the test was a signal aimed at China, designed to demonstrate North 
Korea's independence from its great-power patron. Others think that Kim 
Jong-un was sending a message to the newly elected president of South 
Korea, Park Geun-hye. Still other North Korea experts have suggested that 
the test was actually meant for domestic consumption, to lift the sagging 
morale of a deprived public or for the regime to curry favor with the 
military. The intended North Korean signal is being analyzed and debated 
by U.S. government officials, who hold views across the spectrum. 
A much simpler explanation exists. Pyongyang tested a nuclear device for 
the same reason it has been testing long-range missile designs: to see what 
works. In truth, the effort was less a signal than an attempt to master the 
technical capabilities that are vital to its nuclear deterrent. 
This rationale should come as no surprise to those steeped in Cold War 
history. Between 1945 and 1992, the United States conducted 1,054 
nuclear tests and fired an untold number of missiles. If the goal had merely 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018216 
been to show the Soviets that the United States meant business, testing 
nearly twice a month throughout the entire Cold War would have been 
overkill. In fact, Operation Sandstone -- a series of three tests at Enewetak 
Atoll in 1948 -- was not intended to warn off the Soviets as tensions rose 
over Berlin. Nor was the series of 48 underground tests launched in the 
summer of 1964 designed to impress the newly installed premier, Leonid 
Brezhnev. And the United States would not have conducted a dozen 
atomic blasts at its Nevada test site in the first half of 1977 -- including the 
Cove, Dofino, Marsilly, Bulkhead, Crewline, Forefoot, Carnelian, Strake, 
Flotost, Gruyere, Scantling, and Scupper detonations -- just because new 
President Jimmy Carter was vulnerable to right-wing criticism. 
The United States did what it did because it needed its ultimate deterrent 
to actually work, and because the technical requirements of the nuclear 
mission continually changed. The ruins of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were 
evidence enough that the United States could destroy cities, but deterring 
the Soviet Union was a far greater challenge. If the Soviets had invaded 
Western Europe, for example, U.S. bombers would have had to penetrate 
alerted Soviet air defenses, identify Soviet ground forces and industrial 
centers, and attack them. Accordingly, U.S. bombers had to be highly 
maneuverable and able to carry multiple weapons, so the bombs 
themselves had to be lighter and smaller than the ones the United States 
used against Japan. The Soviets put another wrinkle in Washington's plans 
when they began to deploy large numbers of their own nuclear weapons. 
The United States needed to find a way to potentially destroy the Soviet 
arsenal on the ground. Eliminating those targets -- numerous and often 
hardened -- required even greater numbers of bombs, even lighter designs, 
and more accurate delivery systems. So the United States updated its 
designs and tested. And tested. And tested again. 
Like the United States during the Cold War, North Korea has apparently 
decided that nuclear weapons are central to its national security strategy. 
With few friends, its conventional military forces outgunned, an economy 
in tatters, and facing off against a superpower prone to deposing 
dictatorships across the globe, the Kim regime set about building an 
operational nuclear arsenal. And just as NATO planned to thwart a Soviet 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018217 
invasion by striking targets in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, North 
Korea presumably plans to defend itself, should war erupt on the 
peninsula, by threatening U.S. regional allies and targets in the United 
States. 
North Korea's mission requires small, lightweight warheads, and missiles 
that work -- and the only way to know that they work is to test them. So 
far, the weapons have proved unspectacular. The country's first nuclear 
test, conducted in 2006, was an embarrassment. Pyongyang had told the 
Chinese that the device would generate four kilotons of explosive power, 
but it ended up producing less than one. The second test in 2009 fared 
slightly better, producing between one and eight kilotons, although it is 
not known what size of a blast the North Koreans had sought. Moreover, 
Pyongyang has much more work to do before it can boast weapons that 
will actually fit on its missiles (which have been, themselves, a series of 
humiliating failures). 
Observers in the West who presume that North Korea's behavior must be 
about signaling should remember NATO and the United States' own 
experience during the Cold War. The United States understood then that 
the ability to conduct nuclear operations was the very foundation of a 
credible deterrence strategy. Today, a sound strategy for dealing with 
North Korea should not ascribe ulterior motives to acts that the United 
States once considered rational and routine. 
The view that nuclear weapons are merely political instruments -- suitable 
for sending signals, but not waging wars -- is now so common in 
Washington, London, and Berlin that it is hard to find anyone who 
disagrees. Yet those comforting assumptions are not shared by leaders 
everywhere. Beyond North Korea, Russia is cutting down its arsenal, 
modernizing the nuclear forces it plans to keep, and increasing its reliance 
on nuclear weapons in national defense strategy. China is slowly 
expanding its own arsenal, while substantially improving its weapons. 
And Iran seems so committed to going nuclear that it has been ready to 
endure crippling sanctions and risk foreign attack. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018218 
It is unfortunate that U.S. policymakers are so convinced of nuclear 
obsolescence that they have difficulty understanding the motivations of 
potential adversaries. It would be tragic, however, if their questionable 
assumptions prevent them from recognizing the deterrence problems that 
lie ahead and the grave difficulties that will be posed by adversaries, such 
as North Korea, that still cling to nuclear weapons. 
JENNIFER LIND is an Associate Professor of government at Dartmouth 
College and the author of Sorry States: Apologies in International 
Politics. KEIR A. LIEBER is an Associate Professor in the Edmund A. 
Walsh School of Foreign Service and Department of Government at 
Georgetown University. DARYL G. PRESS is an Associate Professor in 
the Government Department at Dartmouth College and Coordinator of 
War and Peace Studies at Dartmouth's John Sloan Dickey Center for 
International Understanding. 
Article 7. 
Foreign Policy in Focus (FPIF) 
The Depths of Malaise in Palestine  
Daniel DePetris 
February 12, 2013 -- When talking about peace in Israel-Palestine, it is 
easy to narrow the conversation to the leaders who are responsible for 
making it. Over the past few years, there have been numerous profiles in 
newspapers and profiles in magazines attempting to document the two 
men who are supposed to make the effort—Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud 
Abbas. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018219 
Delving into the lives and minds of world leaders is an undoubtedly 
helpful, exciting, and informative way to find answers, but a conflict as 
multifaceted and complicated as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute cannot be 
fully explained without taking into account the opinions of the ordinary 
people who live the reality every single day. Millions of Israelis and 
Palestinians on both sides of the green line have had their voices drowned 
out by the very politicians, lawmakers, and personalities who purport to 
represent them. 
The result is a host of unanswered questions. What does the average 
Israeli or Palestinian think about the chances for a lasting and 
comprehensive peace agreement? What types of concessions need to be 
given for a deal to be struck? Do Israelis have the political courage to 
sacrifice on settlements and Jerusalem so the conflict can finally be 
resolved? Can the Palestinians negotiate in good faith? 
Luckily, polling organizations in Israel and Palestine have spent years 
trying to answer these very questions, often working together and sharing 
their resources during the hunt. 
Two of the latest polls, one from the Jerusalem Media and 
Communications Center (JMCC) and the other from the Palestinian Center 
for Policy and Survey Research (PCPSR), are particularly telling. Unlike 
other surveys that confirm what most in the international community 
already think, the results of these polls are unprecedented, revealing a 
stark and disturbing malaise in the Palestinian territories. 
The message is clear: frustration with the conflict is at a high point, the 
two-state solution is steadily losing credibility in the eyes of the people, 
and ordinary citizens in the Holy Land are starting to wonder whether a 
settlement can be achieved without another round of bloodshed. 
Oslo Fatigue 
When asked by the PSPSR whether Mahmoud Abbas's policy of peace 
talks or armed resistance by Hamas is the best way to achieve a 
Palestinian state, an alarming 60 percent of Palestinians surveyed threw in 
their lot with armed resistance (compared to 28 percent who favored 
negotiations). With the eight-day Israel-Hamas war having ended with a 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018220 
ceasefire that many view as a victory for the Islamist group, Hamas Prime 
Minister Ismail Haniyeh finds his popularity having soared. Forty-eight 
percent of Palestinians say that they would rather pick Haniyeh as 
Palestine's next president instead of Abbas, who has struggled to secure 
the freedom of movement and self-determination that so many 
Palestinians once expected from his government. 
The JMCC issued similar findings. By far the most disturbing figure in the 
poll is the exponential rise in support among the Palestinian public for 
armed operations against Israel-50.9 percent now view attacking Israeli 
positions in the current climate as a credible way to express their 
grievances and pressure the Israeli government to compromise. This is a 
20-percent increase from the previous year. 
The numbers can perhaps best be summarized by Ali Najjar, an 18-year-
old Palestinian who lives in a refugee camp. "In my view," he said, "what 
was taken by force will only be returned by force. Twenty years after 
Oslo, we haven't gained one inch of Palestine." 
Many young Palestinians agree. Indeed, the words summarize the how 
dire the situation has become for an entire generation of Palestinians, most 
of whom are too young to remember the signing of the Oslo Accords in 
1993. Most have not seen any benefit from peace agreements or 
negotiations, and all of them have grown tired of the settlement 
construction in the West Bank, the killing of Palestinian civilians, and the 
internal fighting among Palestinian politicians that never seems to 
dissipate. 
The Corrosive Status Quo 
One cannot blame Palestinian civilians for feeling this way. The previous 
year was a terrible one for Abbas and his government. Settlement tenders 
and approvals in the West Bank rose to such an extent that the anti-
settlement organization Peace Now named 2012 "the year of the  
settlement," with the Ministry of Defense authorizing an additional 6,000 
housing units and Netanyahu pushing for the construction of 11,000  
homes in the month of December alone. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018221 
The lack of economic support from donor nations and the restrictions that 
impede the Palestinian economy from functioning at anywhere near its full 
potential have also made for a deadly cocktail for Abbas' Palestinian 
Authority. Combined with the occasional holding of Palestinian tax 
revenue by the Israelis, the PA is finding it incredibly difficult to pay the 
tens of thousands of employees on its payroll. 
The recent Israeli parliamentary elections perhaps best illustrate where the 
Palestinian issue is today: at the bottom of the barrel. Israeli politicians 
chose to focus their campaigning on social and economic issues, from the 
price of housing and cost of living to whether religious students should be 
drafted into the Israeli military like everyone else. The only Israeli 
candidate who spoke about the need to reengage the Palestinians in peace 
talks was the former foreign minister Tzipi Livni, whose party failed to 
reach double-digits in the incoming parliament. 
The overall message is depressingly familiar to Palestinians: creating a 
Palestinian state in the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem is 
simply not on the list of priorities for Israel at the current time. And the 
Palestinian Authority is proving itself to be an increasingly fragile 
governing body without the constant generosity of foreign countries; it's 
an institution that cannot adequately care for its people, let alone its 
employees who go months without pay. The average Palestinian is losing 
hope that peace is possible in his or her lifetime. Palestinian leaders may 
speak of ending the occupation, but for those who live under it, the 
occupation is so ingrained that escaping it has become a violation of the 
normal. 
Some may take the more militant attitudes of Palestinians as confirmation 
that Israel does not have a partner for peace. Yet those attitudes can also 
be viewed differently: without a renewed effort at peacemaking, however 
frustrating and difficult it will be, the conflict will reach a nadir where 
searching for a peace partner will be irrelevant. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018222 
*********************************************************** 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
Jeffrey Epstein 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 018223
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #5
================================================================================
Date: 2/15/2013 4:52:58 PM
Subject: 
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
take-it-or-leave-it deal by the U.S. on the 
nuclear issue is the wrong strategy  
Ray Takeyh 
February 14, 2013 -- On Feb. 26, the United States and Iran will once 
more resume their diplomatic ritual, in the so-called six-party talks, over 
Iran's disputed nuclear program. As the two perennial adversaries eye one 
another, there are competing paradigms about how to deal with Tehran. 
An emerging school of thought suggests that the best means of "testing" 
Iran is to offer it a final nuclear agreement that presumably promises 
measurable relief from sanctions for significant Iranian concessions. Iran's 
failure to grasp such an offer would then conclusively demonstrate to both 
domestic and international audiences that the cause of the impasse is not 
American belligerence but Iranian truculence. 
But this approach fails to recognize that an arms-control process is 
necessarily an incremental one, nor does it offer a practical substitute to 
the existing step-by-step diplomacy. 
Iran's nuclear program encompasses a vast complex of enrichment 
facilities, centrifuge construction plants, uranium extraction companies 
and thousands of scientists working in university and government 
laboratories. Iran is enriching uranium at both 5% and 20% levels, 
experimenting with high-velocity centrifuges and seemingly in the process 
of constructing additional enrichment facilities. 
Such a multilayered, multifaceted program can be dealt with only on a 
piecemeal basis, as the technical details and rules for inspections are too 
complex to be addressed in a single agreement. 
Moreover, should the United States offer Iran a final deal, Tehran still has 
a right to contest and negotiate its provisions and offer counterproposals. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028648 
The international community is unlikely to concede to either more 
sanctions or the use of force until Iran's objections are taken into full 
consideration. As such, a grand deal that is supposed to provoke a moment 
of clarity is likely to be enmeshed in the existing, protracted arms-control 
process. 
Another complication is the advent of public opinion and critical 
constituencies in Iran devoted to the perpetuation of the program. The 
growing public sentiment is that Iran has a right to acquire a nuclear 
capability. As the program matures, it is becoming a source of pride for a 
citizenry accustomed to the revolution's setbacks and failures. 
Also emerging is a bureaucratic and scientific establishment with its own 
parochial considerations for sustaining the nuclear investment. A clerical 
leadership that is dealing with a restive population and empowered 
security services cannot easily dispense with its nuclear trump card. 
All this suggests that the best means of addressing Iran's nuclear challenge 
is to mitigate its most dangerous dimensions. The focus should remain on 
Iran's high-grade enrichment and its underground nuclear facility nestled 
in mountains outside Qom. Tehran seems to have conceived an ingenious 
path to nuclear advancement, one that involves increasing the size and 
sophistication of its civilian atomic apparatus to the point where it can 
quickly surge into a bomb. While staying within the rules of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency's inspection process, Iran is 
essentially expanding its capabilities while shielding them under the 
veneer of legality. Given the fact that much of civilian nuclear technology 
can easily be misappropriated for military purposes, Iran can construct an 
elaborate nuclear infrastructure while remaining within IAEA guidelines. 
The diplomatic challenge is to derail this path to a nuclear weapon by 
imposing significant restraints on its program. And this can still be done 
through a process that proceeds incrementally and sequentially. 
U.S. officials would be wise to get out of the crisis mode and put some 
time back on the clock. The Iran issue always seems urgent, and yet 
somehow there is always time to deal with it. Washington should 
acknowledge the obvious, namely, that given Iran's gradualist approach, it 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028649 
is still years from completing an efficient enrichment infrastructure, 
constructing a nuclear arsenal and developing a reliable means of delivery. 
By agreeing to a compressed timeline, the U.S. only narrows its options 
and makes a solution even more elusive. 
As the United States again contemplates its Iran conundrum, it should 
eschew calls for a take-it-or-leave-it deal. The history of Iran's 
confrontation with the international community suggests that keeping it a 
crisis situation benefits the Islamic Republic. Ironically, it is the Western 
powers that have generated alarmist conditions. And then to escape the 
predicament of their own making, they offer Iran more concessions and 
further incentives. 
To avoid a repeat of that outcome, it would be prudent to have a sense of 
proportionality and appreciate that, in the end, time works best for the 
United States and not the economically beleaguered theocracy. 
Ray Takeyh is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. 
Article 2. 
The Guardian  
Whether it's North Korea or Iran, sanctions  
won't work  
Simon Jenkins 
13 February 2013 -- Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinej ad. 'Threats 
and sanctions have not weakened the regime's determination to proceed 
[with nuclear weapons], but rather weakened opposition to it'. Photograph: 
Sven Hoppe/EPA 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028650 
North Korea has  set off a third nuclear test explosion. It has done so in 
defiance of the UN, America, Japan and even, reportedly, its sponsor, 
China. It has said to hell with everyone, in a brutal comment on western 
economic sanctions. 
The UN security council met yesterday and Washington threatened 
"significant consequences" — code nowadays for "tighter sanctions". Every 
shred of evidence suggests that these will not achieve the declared goal. 
They will merely add to the impoverishment of North Korea's people by 
its own government. Sanctions are the most counter-productive tool 
known to diplomacy. Yet we keep imposing them. Why? 
Sanctions assume that all countries react to external pressure as might a 
capitalist democracy. They assume a misguided regime will change its 
mind and put financial advantage above its definition of national interest. 
"Smart sanctions" (really dumb sanctions) further assume the rich can be 
punished without punishing the poor, and that all dictators' wives want to 
fly abroad and shop at Harrods. They assume that trade guides political 
action and political action trumps dictatorship. 
Economic sanctions are hugely popular to western politicians, not because 
of their effect but because of their cause: the desire to stand on an 
international stage and being seen to "do something". They are the least-
cost first resort of the laptop bombardiers of global intervention. They 
sound punitive and aggressive without inflicting any hardship on the 
imposer. 
After North Korea the other target in the sanctions frame is Iran. 
Everything at present suggests that ever-tighter sanctions have done 
nothing to curb Iran's nuclear programme. Indeed, by inducing paranoia, 
probably the reverse. Sanctions have certainly "bitten", to the glee of their 
advocates. They have brought inflation and a collapse in the currency, the 
rial. They have harmed ordinary people and solidified sentiment against 
the west and the "great Satan" of the US. Assassination and cyber-
weapons have wiped out a few scientists and scrambled a few computers. 
What sanctions have not done is weakened the power of the ayatollahs or 
their private army, the Revolutionary Guards. Both seem as secure as ever, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028651 
while (relatively) moderate civilian politicians are reduced to feuding and 
arresting each others' children. Iran's nuclear programme appears to 
proceed independent even of the organs of its own state. 
A spoof article in the Economist last year portrayed Iran's supreme leader, 
Ayatollah Khamenei, ruminating on western nations' obsessive posturing 
towards his country. He mused that these were unstable, unreliable places, 
dangerous though probably not all mad. But since it was hard to be sure, "I 
would feel a lot safer if we already had that bomb". Similar insecurity 
drove sanctioned Cuba to accept Russian missiles in the 1960s, and 
sanctioned Iraq and Libya to pretend to build weapons of mass destruction 
in the 1990s. 
Sanctions never stop bad things happening. Rather they entrench dictators, 
build up siege economies and debilitate the urban middle class from which 
opposition to dictatorship grows. As Khamenei said in a speech a year  
ago, sanctions were "painful ... but make us more self-reliant". Indeed, for 
a regime to be sanctioned is to receive an elixir: witness Castro, Gaddafi, 
the ayatollahs and the ruling cliques of Burma, Afghanistan and North 
Korea. That sanctioned regimes sometimes come to an end is not proof 
that sanctions work, rather that they take a long time and usually require 
war to "work". 
This is a rarely researched topic because sanctions are diplomatic ideology 
rather than science. A debate in 1998 in International Security magazine  
saw the Chicago academic, Robert Pape, barely challenged in his view 
that only around five of the 115 cases of sanctions imposed since the war 
could claim any plausible efficacy. Most merely inflicted "significant 
human costs on the populations of target states, including on innocent 
civilians who have little influence on their government's behaviour". They 
are a ready invitation to war. 
When I was reporting on South Africa in the 1980s I became convinced 
that sanctions were aiding import substitution and benefiting the Afrikaner 
economy, probably giving apartheid an extra decade of life. They likewise 
prolonged Ian Smith's regime in Rhodesia. Sanctions made Libya's 
Gaddafi so rich he could spoon money into the London School of 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028652 
Economics. They made Saddam Hussein one of the 10 wealthiest people 
in the world. Besides, sanctions create sanctions-busting which, like drugs, 
is a global criminal industry born entirely of the idiocy of western 
diplomacy. 
A year ago the  Foreign Office defended yet another round of sanctions  
against Tehran on the grounds they would "hasten Iran's economic 
collapse and deepen rifts within the regime, in the hope that saner voices 
will deem the price of pursuing nuclear weapons too high". Economies 
don't collapse, any more than poverty changes governments. Even Greece, 
now the most "sanctioned" nation in Europe, has not collapsed. Places just 
get poorer. As for "saner voices", they go into exile, hiding or prison. 
That's where sanctions send them. 
Iran is a proud nation of 80 million mostly Muslim people, one of many 
Asian and African states struggling between theocracy and democracy, 
tradition and modernity. These are agonising struggles among and within 
peoples, to which the west has contributed nothing but hostility and 
belligerence. Under the cloak of "counter-terror", it has been as crass as it 
was during the Crusades. Of course no one wants to see nuclear weapons 
spread. Russia tried to stop China getting them. China tried to stop North 
Korea. The west tried to stop India and Pakistan, while hypocritically 
tolerating Israel and the replenished arsenals of France and Britain. No 
pressure made the slightest difference to anyone. 
If Iran really wants a nuclear weapon, it will get one — the more so when it 
is threatened with dire retribution if it does. That is how such states react 
to pressure. Ever since the dodgy election of 2009, threats and sanctions 
have not weakened the regime's determination to proceed, but rather 
weakened opposition to it. If ever there was a country unlikely to respond 
to diplomatic bullying, it is Iran. If ever there was a country that might 
respond to constructive engagement, to commercial, governmental and 
cultural intercourse, it is also Iran. Why the west should want to make it 
another North Korea passes comprehension. 
Article 3. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028653 
The Washington Institute 
Year of Decision: U.S. Policy toward Iran in  
2013 
James F. Jeffrey and Thomas Pickering  
February 12, 2013 -- On February 7, 2013, James F. Jeffrey and Thomas 
Pickering addressed a Policy Forum at The Washington Institute. 
Ambassador Jeffrey, a former assistant to the president and deputy 
national security advisor, is author of the new Institute study Moving to  
Decision: U.S. Policy toward Iran. Ambassador Pickering served in 
numerous key posts at home and abroad over a five-decade career, 
including undersecretary of state for political affairs. The following is a 
rapporteur's summary of their remarks. 
JAMES F. JEFFREY 
The move to decision on Iran is the most pressing and dangerous issue on 
the U.S. and international agenda in 2013. The year ahead will largely 
define the longstanding struggle between Washington and Tehran, and the 
considerable stakes involved make it absolutely crucial that a swift and 
decisive resolution be achieved. Regardless of the outcome of the nuclear 
issue, however, Iran will continue to present a long-term challenge to the 
United States because of clashing ideologies, conflicting foreign policy 
goals, and Iran's claim to regional hegemony. 
There are four likely outcomes to the nuclear issue: a unilateral Iranian 
decision to halt or dramatically slow its progress toward a nuclear weapon; 
a negotiated outcome, whether through the P5+1 (i.e., the five permanent 
members of the UN Security Council plus Germany) or bilateral 
negotiations; a military strike, as threatened by President Obama and 
Israeli prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu, and an explicit or implicit 
shift to containment, indicating that Washington would be prepared to 
coexist with a nuclear-armed Iran. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028654 
The most effective resolution would be a negotiated outcome -- to achieve 
it, Washington will need to take preliminary steps on several fronts. A 
serious compromise needs to be put on the table, including an offer to 
suspend crippling oil sanctions in return for specific, verifiable Iranian 
steps to eliminate any nuclear breakout capabilities. Equally significant is 
establishing a credible military threat, given that Tehran has been willing 
to endure increasing economic pressure in order to continue its nuclear 
program. The regime is unlikely to concede anything during negotiations 
if it does not believe that Washington will actually follow through on such 
threats. Although specific public redlines are often unpalatable, the Obama 
administration must clarify internally when it would take military steps, 
and these intentions must be made clear to the Iranians. 
In the same vein, the military option requires a credible negotiating 
complement, as seen in the early 1990s with Iraq. To legitimize military 
action against Saddam Hussein's regime, Washington had to prove that all 
other options had been exhausted. Similarly, the only way to set the 
predicate for military action against Iran is to show the regime and the 
international community that everything has been tried, and that 
Washington has left Tehran with a way out. Failure to do so would 
undermine the legitimacy of any strikes. 
It is also important to understand that curtailing Iran's nuclear progress 
will not by itself alter the regime's regional agenda -- nuclear ambitions 
are but an extension of Tehran's wider aspirations toward hegemony in the 
Middle East. Unfortunately, none of the longer-term proposals for 
addressing that issue seem feasible at the moment (e.g., regime change by 
internal or external means; a shift in Tehran's views on the Supreme 
Leader and succession; a "grand deal" between Washington, Iran, and the 
international community). 
One lesson to be learned from past interactions with Tehran (or lack 
thereof) is that when the United States proactively opposes Iranian 
aggression in the Middle East, the regime relents, but when Washington 
offers a more passive response, Iranian aggression increases. With respect 
to Syria, for example, it cannot be assumed that Bashar al-Assad will fall 
at all, let alone quickly, without active U.S. engagement. If the Assad 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028655 
regime does in fact survive, Iran would become increasingly emboldened, 
with potentially disastrous consequences for the United States and its 
allies and interests in the Middle East. 
Denuding U.S. forces in the region to enable a pivot to Asia is also risky. 
Nowhere else in the world is America more likely to deploy forces than in 
the Persian Gulf in opposition to Iran, and nowhere else is it of utmost 
importance that any potential confrontation be won decisively in the next 
five to ten years than with the Islamic Republic. 
Going forward, Washington must discriminate between Iranian behaviors 
it considers unacceptable -- such as support for terrorism, hegemonic 
ambitions, and progress toward nuclear weapons -- and those it can 
tolerate. U.S. officials could open the door for negotiations by making 
clear to Tehran that they do not seek regime change; the first step in that 
regard would be to let Iran know that Washington respects it as a nation-
state and not a transnational revolutionary movement. 
Finally, disorganization within the U.S. government and a "go it alone" 
mentality have accounted for many of Washington's internal difficulties in 
responding to the Iranian challenge. To alleviate this problem, all cabinet-
level officials must be in constant and complete coordination, devoid of 
routine bureaucratic obstacles. In addition, the appointment of a senior 
subcabinet official whose sole responsibility is Iran (or, alternatively, a 
small group of officials in constant coordination) could allow the 
administration to reorganize bureaucratically in preparation for this year of 
decision. 
THOMAS PICKERING 
Discussions of containment policy typically imply accepting the Islamic 
Republic as an inevitable nuclear power and using deterrence to deal with 
a nuclear-armed Iran. Yet such an outcome would be disastrous for U.S. 
nonproliferation policy, which is based on the notion that fewer nuclear 
states means less chance of miscalculated use. If Iran attains a nuclear 
weapon, other regional powers would likely follow suit -- clearly an 
undesirable outcome for the international community. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028656 
At the other end of the spectrum, using military means in the short term to 
guarantee prevention would entail a vast use of force -- essentially an 
unofficial, semipermanent occupation of Iran. This is not a viable path, 
particularly since other diplomatic possibilities have not yet been 
exhausted. 
Similarly, sanctions, while effective, are not sufficient by themselves. 
They must be intertwined with negotiations -- as Washington and its allies 
increase the pressure, cohesive and meaningful talks with equivalent 
concessions should follow suit. Some have argued that negotiations should 
expand to a "big for big" format, but decades of mistrust between the 
United States and Iran make smaller deals more practical. Such an 
approach would have to focus on ending Iran's most problematic 
enrichment activity: processing uranium to the 20 percent threshold, which 
makes the leap to weapons-grade material much easier. Instead, the regime 
could limit itself to 5 percent enrichment, and under strict supervision by 
the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
The intelligence community widely believes that although Iran has not yet 
decided to make a nuclear weapon, it is still moving to acquire all the 
necessary capabilities in case it chooses that path. Accordingly, 
Washington will need to obtain a concrete Iranian commitment to convert 
its stocks of readily upgradeable gaseous uranium into metallic fuel 
elements, which pose significantly less of a threat. A serious inspection 
system would need to be implemented in order to monitor these 
requirements. In return, the Iranians would expect the lifting of nuclear-
related sanctions. They would also likely ask for acknowledgement that 
they have the right to continue their civil enrichment program, whether for 
supposed use in cancer treatment or to safeguard against a potential 
Russian decision to cease fueling the Bushehr reactor. 
Thus far, President Obama has been frustrated at the lack of progress in 
response to his openness toward the Iranian regime, and his new cabinet 
has an obligation to help him solidify a negotiating position that improves 
the situation. If the Iranians continue to reject U.S. positions that 
seemingly respond to some of their demands, then the administration 
should begin applying other pressures. These steps should be taken sooner 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028657 
rather than later so that the parties can move toward a mutually acceptable 
conclusion. 
Washington must also keep in mind that Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei 
has the last word on all matters in Iran, and that negotiations will go only 
as far as he allows them to go. In years past, he issued a fatwa condemning 
nuclear weapons -- Washington could take advantage of this fact by 
drafting a UN Security Council resolution endorsing the fatwa. This could 
be a small step toward boosting Khamenei's international profile while 
simultaneously pressuring Iran to follow its own religious decree. 
To be sure, regime change remains an attractive alternative on paper, and 
some in Washington view it as an insurance policy. Historically, however, 
regime change has not been a successful option for the United States, and 
internal attempts at toppling Iran's leadership have thus far been crushed 
by Stalinesque suppression, including the 2009 uprising. Despite such 
failures and Washington's limited influence in Iranian domestic affairs, 
U.S. policy should be to demonstratively support popular democratic 
movements. 
Article 4. 
TIME 
Spy Fail: Why Iran Is Losing Its Covert War  
with Israel  
Karl Vick 
Feb. 13, 2013 -- Slumped in a Nairobi courtroom, suit coats rumpled and 
reading glasses dangling from librarian chains, the defendants made a poor 
showing for the notorious Quds Force of the elite Iranian Revolutionary 
Guard Corps. Ahmad Abolafathi Mohammed and Sayed Mansour Mousa 
had been caught red-handed and middle-aged. And if the latter did them a 
certain credit — blandly forgettable always having been a good look for a 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028658 
secret agent — the prisoners still had to explain why they had hidden 15 
kg of the military explosive RDX under bushes on a Mombasa golf 
course. 
Created to advance Iran's interests clandestinely overseas, the Quds Force 
has lately provided mostly embarrassment, stumbling in Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, India, Kenya and most spectacularly in Thailand, where before 
accidentally blowing up their Bangkok safe house, Iran's secret agents  
were photographed in the sex-tourism mecca of Pattaya, one arm around a 
hookah, the other around a hooker. In its ongoing shadow war with Israel, 
the Iranian side's lone "success" was the July 18 bombing of a Bulgarian 
bus carrying Israeli tourists — though European investigators last week 
officially attributed that attack to Iran's Lebanese proxy, Hizballah. That 
leaves the Islamic Republic itself with a failure rate hovering near 100% 
abroad and an operational tempo — nine overseas plots uncovered in nine 
months — that carries a whiff of desperation. A Tehran government long 
branded by U.S. officials as the globe's leading exporter of terrorism may 
be cornering the market on haplessness. 
Within Iran's own borders, however, the story is different. Twice in the 
past two years Iranian intelligence has cracked espionage rings working 
with Israel's Mossad, Western intelligence officials tell TIME. In both 
cases, the arrests were the furthest thing from secret: announced at a news 
conference, each was later followed up by televised confessions broadcast 
on Iranian state television in prime time. Given Iran's history of trumped-
up confessions, skepticism is more than justified. But the arrests appear to 
be solid. One intelligence official said the captured Iranians provided 
"support and logistics" to the Mossad operatives who carried out the 
assassinations of Iranian nuclear scientists. 
At least four scientists were killed on Tehran's streets from 2010 to 2012, 
when, as TIME has reported, Israel ratcheted back on covert operations 
inside Iran. Officially, Israel has remained silent on the killings, though 
government officials will coyly say they welcome the deaths. The Jewish 
state maintains the same ambiguous posture on other "setbacks" to Iran's 
nuclear program widely — and correctly, Western intelligence officials 
say — attributed to Mossad, from the Stuxnet computer virus, to 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028659 
mysterious explosions like the massive blast at a missile base, which 
destroyed ballistic missiles that could reach Israel. 
The covert onslaught dovetails with Israel's history of reaching "over the 
horizon" to disarm perceived threats at a distance. To keep advanced arms 
from reaching Hamas and Hizballah, Israel in the past year sent warplanes 
to bomb convoys and arms depots in Sudan and Syria, respectively, 
without apparent retribution. In the case of Iran, however, experts say the 
audacity of Israel's covert campaign stirred Tehran to revive an espionage 
effort that lay largely fallow since 9/11. The Spy vs. Spy contest that 
ensued would prove woefully one-sided, even in the third-world countries 
where Iran chose to strike, hoping to avoid heightened security awareness 
in the developed world. In the end, its only success came inside Iran, 
where the secret police operate without inhibition. 
The shadow war may have started on Jan. 15, 2007, the day Ardeshir 
Hosseinpour passed away. Hosseinpour was a specialist in 
electromagnetics at the Nuclear Technology Center in the city of Isfahan, 
Iran, but his death might have escaped notice had Iran's government not 
kept it under wraps for almost a week, finally attributing it to fumes from 
a faulty heater. An online report by the American private intelligence firm 
Stratfor suggested another cause — radioactive poisoning — and hinted 
that Mossad's Caesarea section was back in business. Caesarea, named for 
an Israeli beach town that dates back to Roman times, is the operations 
branch of Israel's secret service, most notoriously responsible for the 
assassinations of some two dozen Palestinians (and an innocent waiter) 
after the 1972 Munich Olympics. Assassinations are carried out by a very 
small unit dubbed Kidon, the Hebrew word for "tip of the spear." Kidon 
operates at a remove from the legions of Mossad employees working in 
less lethal fields. 
It would have been a unit called Hatzomet, or "The Junction," that 
recruited Majid Fashi, a handsome young Iranian who dropped out of high 
school to pursue a career in kickboxing. By the account he gave on Iranian 
state television early in 2011, Fashi presented himself at the Israeli 
consulate in Istanbul in 2007 and was vetted for a solid year before being 
shown any trust. Two years later, on Jan. 12, 2010, he would place a bomb 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028660 
on a motorbike parked on the sidewalk outside the Tehran home of 
Masoud Alimohammadi, the nuclear physicist was killed when it was 
detonated by remote control. 
In the broadcast, Fashi accurately described the Mossad campus north of 
Tel Aviv. He said he had been given a laptop equipped with a second 
operating system and used it to communicate through online drop boxes. 
He was impressed by his handlers' thoroughness. At one point Fashi 
described studying a scale model of Alimohammadi's street. "It was an 
exact copy of the real one," Fashi said. "The tree next it, the street curb, 
the bridge." In a later broadcast, he was seated across from 
Alimohammadi's widow, who glared at him as he bowed his head and 
wept. Mossad officials were "pissed off and shocked" seeing their agent 
on television, the intelligence official said. 
Fashi was executed in May 2012. About the same time, Iran's intelligence 
minister announced the arrest of 14 more Iranians, eight men and six 
women dubbed members of the "Terror Club" in the subsequent  prime-
time broadcast of that name. Filmed in shadow, and rich in atmospherics, 
the Aug. 5 program recreated Alimohammadi's death and four subsequent 
attacks: they started with the Nov. 29, 2010 nearly simultaneous attempts 
on Majid Shariari and Fereydoun Abbasi, nuclear scientists driving to 
work when magnetic "sticky bombs" were attached to the side of their cars 
from passing motorcycles. Abbasi managed to escape before it detonated, 
saving his wife as well. Shariari was killed — a significant setback for the 
Iranian nuclear program where he was the top scientist, according to a 
Western intelligence official. 
The confessed agents offered absorbing detail — they were aboard a Bajaj 
Pulsar, wearing helmets, when the magnet bomb stuck on the right front 
panel of Shariari's car exploded. The riders scrambled into the "trail car" 
assigned to follow the target and disappeared into the traffic of the Imam 
Ali Autobahn. Already gone was the car assigned to cut off and slow the 
car carrying the scientist. They claimed to have rehearsed on a practice 
track inside Israel. None of the details could be confirmed, but an 
intelligence official acknowledged: "Another network was taken." 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028661 
The third scientist, Dariush Rezaeinejad was shot on July 23, 2011 after 
picking up his child at a day care; his wife described hearing shots whiz by 
as she chased the assailants. The most recent assassination was the Jan. 11, 
2012 death of Mustafa Ahmadi-Roshan, an expert on uranium enrichment, 
also by a magnet bomb slapped on his car during his morning commute. 
By then, Iran was trying to strike back. The task of avenging the scientists 
fell to the sprawling Quds Force's own covert-operations division, known 
as Unit 400. It took a shotgun approach, targeting Israeli diplomatic 
missions in a variety of countries, mostly in the developing world where 
the global antiterrorism mesh is not so fine. Exposed in Baku, Tbilisi, 
Johannesburg, Mombasa and Bangkok, the failures mounted at a pace that 
was itself one of the problems. In the world of espionage, a quality covert 
operation can take years to pull together. Yet in the 15 months from May 
2011 to July 2012, the Quds Force and Hizballah attempted 20 attacks, by 
the count of Matthew Levitt, a former State Department counterterrorism 
official. "Hizballah and the Quds Force traded speed for tradecraft and 
reaped what they sowed," Levitt writes in a January report for the 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Quds Force planners were 
stretched thin by the rapid tempo of their new attack plan, and were forced 
to throw together random teams of operatives who had not trained 
together." 
The decline in quality was so striking it initially inspired disbelief Recall 
the preposterous-sounding plot weaving together a former used-car 
salesman, Mexico's Zetas drug gang and a bank transfer from a 
Revolutionary Guard account to assassinate Saudi Arabia's ambassador — 
by bombing a Washington restaurant? A year on it looks like the new 
normal. In Bangkok last month, an Iranian agent entered a courtroom in a 
wheelchair, having accidentally blown his legs off while fleeing police. A 
January alert issued by Turkish intelligence was light on specifics but 
quite certain the Quds operatives would be staying in five-star hotels. 
"There's a number of reasons that Iranian intelligence has suffered," says 
Meir Javedanfar, an Iranian-born analyst who lectures at the 
Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, Israel. "No. 1," he says, "is the 2009 
uprisings in Iran." The street protests over a fraudulent election 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028662 
undermined the perceived legitimacy of the state among people who once 
would work for it, including in its secret services. "People less and less see 
it as a nationalist endeavor and more as a Khamenei-related project to 
strengthen himself," Javedanfar says, referring to Iran's Supreme Leader 
Ayatullah Ali Khamenei, who by some published accounts personally 
authorizes all overseas attacks. 
Hard-liners further aggravated the situation by purging competent 
reformists from both the secret services and from Iran's embassies — 
crucial to a force expected to work undetected abroad. "Basically the Quds 
Force doesn't cooperate with the Foreign Ministry, and the Foreign 
Ministry isn't what it used to be either," says Javedanfar. Under President 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, 42% of ministry employees have only high 
school degrees. "The regime is a bigger threat to itself than Israel," he 
says. 
Karl Vick has been TIME's Jerusalem bureau chief since 2010, covering 
Israel, the Palestine territories and nearby sovereignties. He worked 16 
years at the Washington Post in Nairobi, Istanbul, Baghdad, Los Angeles 
and Rockville, MD. 
Article 5. 
YaleGlobal 
Is the US Ready To Be Number Two?  
Kishore Mahbubani 
11 February 2013 -- SINGAPORE: Long before anyone did, former US 
president Bill Clinton saw that America would have to prepare for the time 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028663 
when it would no longer be the number one power in the world. In his 
2003 Yale University address on "Global Challenges," he said: 
If you believe that maintaining power and control and absolute freedom of 
movement and sovereignty is important to your country's future, there's 
nothing inconsistent in that [the US continuing to behaving unilaterally]. 
[The US is] the biggest, most powerful country in the world now. . . . But 
if you believe that we should be trying to create a world with rules and 
partnerships and habits of behavior that we would like to live in when 
we're no longer the military political economic superpower in the world, 
then you wouldn't do that. It just depends on what you believe. 
Long before 2003, Clinton wanted to begin preparing Americans for this 
new world. "Clinton believed [...] what we had in the wake of the cold 
war was a multilateral moment — an opportunity to shape the world 
through our active leadership of the institutions Clinton admired and 
[Charles] Krauthammer disdained," writes Strobe Talbott, former deputy 
secretary of state in his book The Great Experiment: The Story of Ancient 
Empires, Modern States, and the Quest for a Global Nation. "But Clinton 
kept that belief largely to himself while he was in office.... political 
instincts told him it would be inviting trouble to suggest that the sun 
would someday set on American preeminence." Sadly, few Americans 
have heeded Clinton's wisdom. Few dare to mention that America could 
well be number two. I discovered this when I chaired a panel on "the 
future of American power" at the 2012 World Economic Forum in Davos. 
After citing projections that America would have the second largest 
economy in just a few years, I asked the American panelists — two 
senators, a congresswoman and a former deputy national security advisor 
— whether Americans are ready to become number two. To my shock, 
none could acknowledge publically this possibility. 
America may well become number two faster than anyone has anticipated. 
According to the most recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
projections, China will have larger share of global GDP than the United 
States by 2017. In 1980, in PPP terms, the US share of the global economy 
was 25 percent, while China's was 2.2 percent. By 2017, the US share will 
decline to 17.9 percent, and China's will rise to 18.3 percent. Even if 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028664 
America becomes number two, we will still have a better world. In many 
ways, the world is "converging" to American values and standards, as I 
explain in The Great Convergence. The global middle class is booming, 
interstate war is waning, and never before have people traveled and 
communicated across the world so easily. These changes are creating 
common values and norms across the world. Education and scientific 
reasoning, for example, are enabling people the world over to speak with a 
common language. However, while humanity is well on its way to 
combating absolute poverty and interstate warfare, other problems are 
surfacing. Preventing and curtailing transnational issues like climate 
change, human and drug trafficking, and financial crises require 
cooperation among nation states, yet this is not happening. A simple 
analogy illustrates this. Before the era of modern globalization, 
humankind was like a flotilla of more than 100 separate boats in their 
separate countries. The world needed a set of rules then to ensure that the 
many boats did not collide and facilitate their cooperation on the high seas 
if they chose to do so. The 1945 rules-based order strived to do this, and 
despite some obvious failures, it succeeded in producing a relatively stable 
global order for more than 50 years. Today, the 7 billion people who 
inhabit planet earth no longer live in more than 100 separate boats. 
Instead, they live in 193 separate cabins on the same boat. But this boat 
has a problem. It has 193 captains and crews, each claiming exclusive 
responsibility for one cabin. No captain or crew cares for the boat as a 
whole. The world is now sailing into increasingly turbulent waters with no 
captain or crew at the helm. The Great Convergence echoes the themes 
of Clinton's 2003 Yale speech. It's in the interest of all — particularly great 
powers — to strengthen institutions of global governance so that we're not 
sailing blindly into choppy waters without a captain. The National 
Intelligence Council recently projected that in 2030 Asia would overtake 
the Western world economically, technologically and militarily. When 
China becomes a world superpower in a matter of decades, the United 
States and Europe will want to ensure that China plays by the rules. 
But in order to make international organizations like the United Nations, 
the IMF and the World Bank more credible and effective, they must 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028665 
undergo serious reform. It is manifestly absurd that the West makes up 12 
percent of the world's population but takes up 60 percent of UN Security 
Council permanent seats. It's nonsensical that the head of the IMF is 
always a European and the head of the World Bank is always an American 
as the West's share of global GDP diminishes every year. This 
concentration of clout in the hands of a relative few has grave implications 
for these institutions' effectiveness and independence, making them 
instruments of the West. No other organization, not even huge global 
NGOs like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation or the Clinton 
Foundation, has the scope and legitimacy that the UN currently enjoys. 
For example, the United States for years has been trying to pressure China 
to take a more proactive role in fighting climate change. Predictably, 
China has resisted these pressures because they saw them as a clever yet 
transparent American ruse to curtail Chinese economic growth. Only when 
the United Nations Development Programme raised the issue with China 
did the Chinese government take heed, as the UNDP is seen as a neutral 
party in China. The UN and its many agencies may soon lose invaluable 
credibility if the West insists on monopolizing its power over these 
institutions. 
Any reform of the UN should take into account three principles: 
democracy, recognition of power balances and the rule of law. Institutions 
of global governance can be made more democratic by ensuring that their 
leadership accurately reflects the composition of world's population. At 
the same time, we must also take into account geopolitical relationships 
among emerging and middle powers. Finally, the rule of law is essential to 
the mediation and resolution of thorny international issues and to 
governing the conduct of states on the international stage so as to prevent 
escalation of conflict. 
In this rapidly changing world, it's a mistake to allow institutions of global 
governance to stay as they are. The 1945 rules-based order is no longer 
appropriate for 21st century circumstances. Global leaders must better 
prepare us for the challenges to come and equip our international 
organizations to deal with them. Leaders must find the courage to continue 
advocating for stronger multilateral cooperation. It is time for our captains 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028666 
and crews to emerge from their cabins and start steering the boat. 
Kishore Mahbubani is dean of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, 
NUS, and author of the forthcoming book The Great Convergence: Asia, 
the West, and the Logic of One World. 
Article 6. 
Foreign affairs 
Pyongyang's Nuclear Logic  
Jennifer Lind, Keir A. Lieber, and Daryl G. Press 
February 14, 2013 -- In his State of the Union address, U.S. President 
Barack Obama described North Korea's recent nuclear test as a 
provocation that required a firm response. The intended audience for that 
provocation, though, is up for debate. Some commentators have posited 
that the test was a signal aimed at China, designed to demonstrate North 
Korea's independence from its great-power patron. Others think that Kim 
Jong-un was sending a message to the newly elected president of South 
Korea, Park Geun-hye. Still other North Korea experts have suggested that 
the test was actually meant for domestic consumption, to lift the sagging 
morale of a deprived public or for the regime to curry favor with the 
military. The intended North Korean signal is being analyzed and debated 
by U.S. government officials, who hold views across the spectrum. 
A much simpler explanation exists. Pyongyang tested a nuclear device for 
the same reason it has been testing long-range missile designs: to see what 
works. In truth, the effort was less a signal than an attempt to master the 
technical capabilities that are vital to its nuclear deterrent. 
This rationale should come as no surprise to those steeped in Cold War 
history. Between 1945 and 1992, the United States conducted 1,054 
nuclear tests and fired an untold number of missiles. If the goal had merely 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028667 
been to show the Soviets that the United States meant business, testing 
nearly twice a month throughout the entire Cold War would have been 
overkill. In fact, Operation Sandstone -- a series of three tests at Enewetak 
Atoll in 1948 -- was not intended to warn off the Soviets as tensions rose 
over Berlin. Nor was the series of 48 underground tests launched in the 
summer of 1964 designed to impress the newly installed premier, Leonid 
Brezhnev. And the United States would not have conducted a dozen 
atomic blasts at its Nevada test site in the first half of 1977 -- including the 
Cove, Dofino, Marsilly, Bulkhead, Crewline, Forefoot, Carnelian, Strake, 
Flotost, Gruyere, Scantling, and Scupper detonations -- just because new 
President Jimmy Carter was vulnerable to right-wing criticism. 
The United States did what it did because it needed its ultimate deterrent 
to actually work, and because the technical requirements of the nuclear 
mission continually changed. The ruins of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were 
evidence enough that the United States could destroy cities, but deterring 
the Soviet Union was a far greater challenge. If the Soviets had invaded 
Western Europe, for example, U.S. bombers would have had to penetrate 
alerted Soviet air defenses, identify Soviet ground forces and industrial 
centers, and attack them. Accordingly, U.S. bombers had to be highly 
maneuverable and able to carry multiple weapons, so the bombs 
themselves had to be lighter and smaller than the ones the United States 
used against Japan. The Soviets put another wrinkle in Washington's plans 
when they began to deploy large numbers of their own nuclear weapons. 
The United States needed to find a way to potentially destroy the Soviet 
arsenal on the ground. Eliminating those targets -- numerous and often 
hardened -- required even greater numbers of bombs, even lighter designs, 
and more accurate delivery systems. So the United States updated its 
designs and tested. And tested. And tested again. 
Like the United States during the Cold War, North Korea has apparently 
decided that nuclear weapons are central to its national security strategy. 
With few friends, its conventional military forces outgunned, an economy 
in tatters, and facing off against a superpower prone to deposing 
dictatorships across the globe, the Kim regime set about building an 
operational nuclear arsenal. And just as NATO planned to thwart a Soviet 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028668 
invasion by striking targets in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, North 
Korea presumably plans to defend itself, should war erupt on the 
peninsula, by threatening U.S. regional allies and targets in the United 
States. 
North Korea's mission requires small, lightweight warheads, and missiles 
that work -- and the only way to know that they work is to test them. So 
far, the weapons have proved unspectacular. The country's first nuclear 
test, conducted in 2006, was an embarrassment. Pyongyang had told the 
Chinese that the device would generate four kilotons of explosive power, 
but it ended up producing less than one. The second test in 2009 fared 
slightly better, producing between one and eight kilotons, although it is 
not known what size of a blast the North Koreans had sought. Moreover, 
Pyongyang has much more work to do before it can boast weapons that 
will actually fit on its missiles (which have been, themselves, a series of 
humiliating failures). 
Observers in the West who presume that North Korea's behavior must be 
about signaling should remember NATO and the United States' own 
experience during the Cold War. The United States understood then that 
the ability to conduct nuclear operations was the very foundation of a 
credible deterrence strategy. Today, a sound strategy for dealing with 
North Korea should not ascribe ulterior motives to acts that the United 
States once considered rational and routine. 
The view that nuclear weapons are merely political instruments -- suitable 
for sending signals, but not waging wars -- is now so common in 
Washington, London, and Berlin that it is hard to find anyone who 
disagrees. Yet those comforting assumptions are not shared by leaders 
everywhere. Beyond North Korea, Russia is cutting down its arsenal, 
modernizing the nuclear forces it plans to keep, and increasing its reliance 
on nuclear weapons in national defense strategy. China is slowly 
expanding its own arsenal, while substantially improving its weapons. 
And Iran seems so committed to going nuclear that it has been ready to 
endure crippling sanctions and risk foreign attack. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028669 
It is unfortunate that U.S. policymakers are so convinced of nuclear 
obsolescence that they have difficulty understanding the motivations of 
potential adversaries. It would be tragic, however, if their questionable 
assumptions prevent them from recognizing the deterrence problems that 
lie ahead and the grave difficulties that will be posed by adversaries, such 
as North Korea, that still cling to nuclear weapons. 
JENNIFER LIND is an Associate Professor of government at Dartmouth 
College and the author of Sorry States: Apologies in International 
Politics. KEIR A. LIEBER is an Associate Professor in the Edmund A. 
Walsh School of Foreign Service and Department of Government at 
Georgetown University. DARYL G. PRESS is an Associate Professor in 
the Government Department at Dartmouth College and Coordinator of 
War and Peace Studies at Dartmouth's John Sloan Dickey Center for 
International Understanding. 
Article 7. 
Foreign Policy in Focus (FPIF) 
The Depths of Malaise in Palestine  
Daniel DePetris 
February 12, 2013 -- When talking about peace in Israel-Palestine, it is 
easy to narrow the conversation to the leaders who are responsible for 
making it. Over the past few years, there have been numerous profiles in 
newspapers and profiles in magazines attempting to document the two 
men who are supposed to make the effort—Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud 
Abbas. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028670 
Delving into the lives and minds of world leaders is an undoubtedly 
helpful, exciting, and informative way to find answers, but a conflict as 
multifaceted and complicated as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute cannot be 
fully explained without taking into account the opinions of the ordinary 
people who live the reality every single day. Millions of Israelis and 
Palestinians on both sides of the green line have had their voices drowned 
out by the very politicians, lawmakers, and personalities who purport to 
represent them. 
The result is a host of unanswered questions. What does the average 
Israeli or Palestinian think about the chances for a lasting and 
comprehensive peace agreement? What types of concessions need to be 
given for a deal to be struck? Do Israelis have the political courage to 
sacrifice on settlements and Jerusalem so the conflict can finally be 
resolved? Can the Palestinians negotiate in good faith? 
Luckily, polling organizations in Israel and Palestine have spent years 
trying to answer these very questions, often working together and sharing 
their resources during the hunt. 
Two of the latest polls, one from the Jerusalem Media and 
Communications Center (JMCC) and the other from the Palestinian Center 
for Policy and Survey Research (PCPSR), are particularly telling. Unlike 
other surveys that confirm what most in the international community 
already think, the results of these polls are unprecedented, revealing a 
stark and disturbing malaise in the Palestinian territories. 
The message is clear: frustration with the conflict is at a high point, the 
two-state solution is steadily losing credibility in the eyes of the people, 
and ordinary citizens in the Holy Land are starting to wonder whether a 
settlement can be achieved without another round of bloodshed. 
Oslo Fatigue 
When asked by the PSPSR whether Mahmoud Abbas's policy of peace 
talks or armed resistance by Hamas is the best way to achieve a 
Palestinian state, an alarming 60 percent of Palestinians surveyed threw in 
their lot with armed resistance (compared to 28 percent who favored 
negotiations). With the eight-day Israel-Hamas war having ended with a 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028671 
ceasefire that many view as a victory for the Islamist group, Hamas Prime 
Minister Ismail Haniyeh finds his popularity having soared. Forty-eight 
percent of Palestinians say that they would rather pick Haniyeh as 
Palestine's next president instead of Abbas, who has struggled to secure 
the freedom of movement and self-determination that so many 
Palestinians once expected from his government. 
The JMCC issued similar findings. By far the most disturbing figure in the 
poll is the exponential rise in support among the Palestinian public for 
armed operations against Israel-50.9 percent now view attacking Israeli 
positions in the current climate as a credible way to express their 
grievances and pressure the Israeli government to compromise. This is a 
20-percent increase from the previous year. 
The numbers can perhaps best be summarized by Ali Najjar, an 18-year-
old Palestinian who lives in a refugee camp. "In my view," he said, "what 
was taken by force will only be returned by force. Twenty years after 
Oslo, we haven't gained one inch of Palestine." 
Many young Palestinians agree. Indeed, the words summarize the how 
dire the situation has become for an entire generation of Palestinians, most 
of whom are too young to remember the signing of the Oslo Accords in 
1993. Most have not seen any benefit from peace agreements or 
negotiations, and all of them have grown tired of the settlement 
construction in the West Bank, the killing of Palestinian civilians, and the 
internal fighting among Palestinian politicians that never seems to 
dissipate. 
The Corrosive Status Quo 
One cannot blame Palestinian civilians for feeling this way. The previous 
year was a terrible one for Abbas and his government. Settlement tenders 
and approvals in the West Bank rose to such an extent that the anti-
settlement organization Peace Now named 2012 "the year of the  
settlement," with the Ministry of Defense authorizing an additional 6,000 
housing units and Netanyahu pushing for the construction of 11,000  
homes in the month of December alone. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028672 
The lack of economic support from donor nations and the restrictions that 
impede the Palestinian economy from functioning at anywhere near its full 
potential have also made for a deadly cocktail for Abbas' Palestinian 
Authority. Combined with the occasional holding of Palestinian tax 
revenue by the Israelis, the PA is finding it incredibly difficult to pay the 
tens of thousands of employees on its payroll. 
The recent Israeli parliamentary elections perhaps best illustrate where the 
Palestinian issue is today: at the bottom of the barrel. Israeli politicians 
chose to focus their campaigning on social and economic issues, from the 
price of housing and cost of living to whether religious students should be 
drafted into the Israeli military like everyone else. The only Israeli 
candidate who spoke about the need to reengage the Palestinians in peace 
talks was the former foreign minister Tzipi Livni, whose party failed to 
reach double-digits in the incoming parliament. 
The overall message is depressingly familiar to Palestinians: creating a 
Palestinian state in the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem is 
simply not on the list of priorities for Israel at the current time. And the 
Palestinian Authority is proving itself to be an increasingly fragile 
governing body without the constant generosity of foreign countries; it's 
an institution that cannot adequately care for its people, let alone its 
employees who go months without pay. The average Palestinian is losing 
hope that peace is possible in his or her lifetime. Palestinian leaders may 
speak of ending the occupation, but for those who live under it, the 
occupation is so ingrained that escaping it has become a violation of the 
normal. 
Some may take the more militant attitudes of Palestinians as confirmation 
that Israel does not have a partner for peace. Yet those attitudes can also 
be viewed differently: without a renewed effort at peacemaking, however 
frustrating and difficult it will be, the conflict will reach a nadir where 
searching for a peace partner will be irrelevant. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028673 
*********************************************************** 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
Jeffrey Epstein 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 028674
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #6
================================================================================
Date: 5/21/2016 10:53:15 AM
Subject: Re: tomorrows news today
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yup. Going to be ugly. Who will win? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On May 21, 2016, at 6:02 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/05/20/trump-bill-clinton-rape n 10062090. html 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031469
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #7
================================================================================
Date: 5/21/2016 12:31:20 PM
Subject: Re: tomorrows news today
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Who is the card cheat? Both have aspects. Will call 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On May 21, 2016, at 7:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
difficult to bet against the card cheat, if you are gambling on the outcome. . I have some great stories , as i 
have just returned from a week of jeffrey style meetings any time today 
On Sat, May 21, 2016 at 6:53 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Yup. Going to be ugly. Who will win? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On May 21, 2016, at 6:02 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/05/20/trump-bill-clinton-rape n 10062090. html 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031470 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031471
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #8
================================================================================
Date: 10/10/2016 12:29:04 AM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. what happened? R u about to be dragged in? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: lhsofficeglawrencesummers.com 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:21 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
trump roles out clintons four accusers. recall our dinner? 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032216
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #9
================================================================================
Date: 10/10/2016 12:45:19 AM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Got it. 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the hillary 
says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031491
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #10
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 5:57:02 AM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Got it. 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the hillary 
says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031519 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031520
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #11
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 3:13:53 PM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Can call circa 11 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers < 
Got it. 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
> wrote: 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031523 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031524 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031525
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #12
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 3:24:02 PM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What number 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Ok 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < 
Can call circa 11 
wrote: 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers <____________________________> wrote: 
Got it. 
Now remember 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031526 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031527 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031528
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #13
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 3:26:54 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
What number 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Ok 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < 
Can call circa 11 
wrote: 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers <MII> wrote: 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
Got it. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031642 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031643 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031644 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031645
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #14
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 5:05:04 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
??? 
On Fri, Nov 11, 2016 at 10:13 AM, Larry Summers - > wrote: 
Can call circa 11 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers wrote: 
Got it. 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031646 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031647 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031648
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #15
================================================================================
Date: 11/11/2016 9:26:17 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
was that circa 11? 
On Fri, Nov 11, 2016 at 10:13 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Can call circa 11 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:___________________________________________ 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Got it. 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031649 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031650 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031651
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #16
================================================================================
Date: 11/13/2016 1:09:02 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
today? 
On Fri, Nov 11, 2016 at 10:24 AM, Larry Summers - wrote: 
What number 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Ok 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers < 
Can call circa 11 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 11, 2016, at 10:08 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
No , -phone today? 
> wrote: 
On Friday, 11 November 2016, Larry Summers <_____________________________wrote: 
Times bad. R u around Tuesday? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 10, 2016, at 4:03 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ehud in on sun pritzker mon. you around? dinner woody sunday. or have you gone dark 
On Mon, Oct 10, 2016 at 2:45 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Got it. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031652 
Now remember 
Press is so revolted by trump that I'd expect they will not be for benefit of doubt. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Oct 9, 2016, at 8:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
no, im out of it. donald brought out four women that said bill abused them. / they wilil feature in the 
hillary says you should give the benefit of the doubt to victims. I laid this out for you over dinner, its 
disgraceful, but. here we are 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031653 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031654 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #17
================================================================================
Date: 11/28/2016 12:52:19 PM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Interesting 
Grey is at least reasonably smart. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 28, 2016, at 7:20 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
http://www.foxbusiness.com/politics/2016/05/01/trump-touts-henry-kravis-as-treasury-secretary-again-and-
again-declines.html  
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032383
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #18
================================================================================
Date: 11/28/2016 8:22:53 PM
Subject: 
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/tom-barrack-donald-trump-presidency-healing-the-nation/ 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032937
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #19
================================================================================
Date: 11/29/2016 7:34:18 AM
Subject: Fwd: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Who is the guy you have set me up with? 
Spend zero effort on anything about me w trump. Seeing his approach to conflict of interest, his Putin 
proximity, and his mindless response on Castro death I'm best off a million miles away. 
Until they are deeply humbled by the fuckups that are sure to come, I serve myself and country best by doing 
nothing that involves loyalty to them. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Afri zp <_______________________ 
Date: November 29, 2016 at 3:26:13 AM GMT-3:30 
To: "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Cc: Larry Summers 
Subject: Re: 
Larry, 
I'll be very please to meet or take you for diner. My mobile in Doha is +97455125119 
Le 29 nov. 2016 a 00:16, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> a ecrit: 
larry, karim, karim - larry, larry will be in doha on wed, i think you two would enjoy meeting 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032384 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032385
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #20
================================================================================
Date: 11/29/2016 12:13:41 PM
Subject: Re: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Always quiet advice to anybody who can use it. Try always discreet. If u become associated publicly w 
something the reputations converge. Looking fwd to meeting Karim. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:_____________________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 29, 2016, at 6:23 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
ok, except I hope they can rely on you to give them guidance privately after the fact.? Karim Wade. is the 
son of the president of Senegal. ( they just found GAS offshore ). He is well educated and one of the most 
important figures in west africa. however full disclosure , he was put in jail to remove him from running 
against the current president . He is in qatar awaiting his political return to power which is almost 
guaranteed. He is the most charismatic ,and rational of all the africans and has theire respect. 
On Tue, Nov 29, 2016 at 2:34 AM, Larry Summers < wrote: 
Who is the guy you have set me up with? 
Spend zero effort on anything about me w trump. Seeing his approach to conflict of interest, his Putin 
proximity, and his mindless response on Castro death I'm best off a million miles away. 
Until they are deeply humbled by the fuckups that are sure to come, I serve myself and country best by doing 
nothing that involves loyalty to them. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Afri zp < 
Date: November 29, 2016 at 3:26:13 AM GMT-3:30 
To: "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Cc: Larry Summers < 
Subject: Re: 
Larry, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026028 
I'll be very please to meet or take you for diner. My mobile in Doha is 
Le 29 nov. 2016 a 00:16, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> a ecrit: 
larry, karim, karim - larry, larry will be in doha on wed, i think you two would enjoy meeting 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026029
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #21
================================================================================
Date: 11/29/2016 10:56:40 PM
Subject: 
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-mnuchin-idUSKBN1302W4 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 032938
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #22
================================================================================
Date: 2/8/2017 5:24:07 AM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Obama or trump or yours 
On Wed, Feb 8, 2017 at 12:03 AM Larry Summers 
It's ok. 
He didn't wreck world and avoided scandal. 
What does Ruemmler say re his attitude towards women? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: • 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 7, 2017, at 1:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
wrote: 
your man of the people 
http ://www.usato day. co m/story/news/nation-now/2017/02/07/pres ident-b arack-ob ama-kiteb o ards-horses-
around-richard-branson-ep ic-vac ation/97592260/  
On Mon, Feb 6, 2017 at 9:17 AM, Larry Summers < 
Yes. In NYC actually. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 6, 2017, at 8:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
speak today 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031657 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031658
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #23
================================================================================
Date: 2/8/2017 9:53:21 AM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
recall ive told you „ i have met some very bad people „ none as bad as trump. not one decent cell in his 
body.. so yes- dangerous 
On Wed, Feb 8, 2017 at 12:03 AM, Larry Summers wrote: 
It's ok. 
He didn't wreck world and avoided scandal. 
What does Ruemmler say re his attitude towards women? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 7, 2017, at 1:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
your man of the people 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2017/02/07/president-barack-obama-kiteboards-horses-
around-richard-branson-epic-vacation/97592260/ 
On Mon, Feb 6, 2017 at 9:17 AM, Larry Summers < 1> wrote: 
Yes. In NYC actually. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 6, 2017, at 8:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
speak today 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031659 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #24
================================================================================
Date: 2/17/2017 11:31:08 AM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And you an interllectual with a Wall Street curiosity 
On Fri, Feb 17, 2017 at 2:55 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
U r wall st tough guy w intellectual curiosity. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 16, 2017, at 10:34 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
i find it amazing -but both. . where do you think I fit in your descriptions.? wall st tough. ? or dem 
fighter for principles 
On Thu, Feb 16, 2017 at 7:40 PM, Larry Summers <_________________________ wrote: 
It was unhinged. 
Your Repub friends are goofy. 
Are any of them w experience in DC or are they wall st tough guy types. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 16, 2017, at 3:31 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
my assessment this morning seemed pretty accurate as to his views. / my republican friends thougt the 
press conference was GREAT , and the dems thought he was " unhinged. " 
On Thu, Feb 9, 2017 at 2:18 PM, Larry Summers <____________________________> wrote: 
Got it. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031662 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 9, 2017, at 2:15 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
I m on palm beach, available after 3. 
On Thu, Feb 9, 2017 at 2:13 PM, Larry Summers <=11111). wrote: 
When r u home. 
Ruemmler predictable. 
U not. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 9, 2017, at 2:07 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you can call ruemm ler. the wind of dissent has turned into a cat 5 hurricane. Already today I have 
gotten 6 high volume irate calls. all similar to can you believe !!! Since this is not really my arena Ill 
have to concede, if only for self preservation. :) 
On Tue, Feb 7, 2017 at 11:03 PM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
It's ok. 
He didn't wreck world and avoided scandal. 
What does Ruemmler say re his attitude towards women? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office a 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 7, 2017, at 1:30 PM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
your man of the people 
http ://www.usato day. com/story/news/nation-now/2017/02/07/president-b arack-ob ama-kiteb o ards-horses-
around-richard-branson-ep ic-vac ation/97592260/  
On Mon, Feb 6, 2017 at 9:17 AM, Larry Summers < wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031663 
Yes. In NYC actually. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Feb 6, 2017, at 8:14 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
speak today 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031664 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031665 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031666
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #25
================================================================================
Date: 10/27/2017 2:59:48 PM
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's rhetoric
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Was there. Spoke well. Spent time w Softbank deputy Najeev or some such PIF guy too. 
Flying back. 
How is life among the lucrative and louche? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
From: jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Sent: Friday, October 27, 2017 6:51 PM 
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: Lawrence Summers < 
saudi? 
On Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 11:04 AM, Lawrence Summers < > wrote: 
Your pal should stay out of press. 
Public link to manafort will be a disaster. 
This is a staggering shit show. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
----------Forwarded message---------- 
From: "The Washington Post" <emailge.washingtonpost.com> 
Date: Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 9:04 AM -0400 
Subject: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029108 
To: "Summers, Lawrence H." 
Democracy Dies in Darkness 
Trending Now 
Wed., Oct. 11, 2017 9:01 a.m. 
Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is  
'stunned' by president's rhetoric  
Billionaire Thomas J. Barrack Jr. has done what few others in Trump's orbit have 
done: He told the president, in effect, that he was wrong. "In my opinion, he's better 
than this," Barrack said. 
Trump's relationship with Barrack is one of the most important, if little understood, of 
the president's life, offering a case study of what it takes to remain close to him in a 
time of such turmoil. 
Read more »  
ADVERTISEMENT 
rt.:8:47 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029109 
You are signed up for the following breaking news alerts: Politics. 
You received this email because you signed up for breaking news alerts. Don't want to receive 
Trending Now alerts? Click here. For additional free email alerts and newsletters, or to 
unsubscribe, click here. 
We respect your privacy. If you believe that this email has been sent to you in error, or you no 
longer wish to receive email from The Washington Post, click here. Contact us for help. 
©2017 The Washington Post, 1301 K St NW, Washington DC 20071  
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029110
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #26
================================================================================
Date: 10/27/2017 3:10:13 PM
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's rhetoric
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Softbank deputy guy i liked and seemed aware and honest re Son. 
Lots of slathering to saudis. I yipped about inclusion. 
I observed that half the IQ In world was possessed by women without mentioning they are more than 51 percent 
of population.... 
Mnuchin plumbs new depths. 
War seems more likely than I used to think 
DjT is world s luckiest guy in terms of opposition, economy etc. still think his world will collapse. 
I'm trying to figure why American elite think if u murder your baby by beating and abandonment it must be 
irrelevant to your admission to Harvard, but hit on a few women 10 years ago and can't work at a network or 
think tank. DO NOT REPEAT THIS INSIGHT 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:02 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
anyone stand out. . ? when we meet I will endeavor to mesmerize you with stories of D.C. so wild. !!!. 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 10:59 AM, Larry Summers __________________________> wrote: 
Was there. Spoke well. Spent time w Softbank deputy Najeev or some such PIF guy too. 
Flying back. 
How is life among the lucrative and louche? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025124 
From: jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Sent: Friday, October 27, 2017 6:51 PM 
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: Lawrence Summers < 
saudi? 
On Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 11:04 AM, Lawrence Summers < > wrote: 
Your pal should stay out of press. 
Public link to manafort will be a disaster. 
This is a staggering shit show. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
----------Forwarded message---------- 
From: "The Washington Post" <emailge.washingtonpost.com> 
Date: Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 9:04 AM -0400 
Subject: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: "Summers, Lawrence H." < 
Democracy Dies in Darkness 
Trending Now 
Wed., Oct. 11, 2017 9:01 a.m. 
Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is  
'stunned' by president's rhetoric  
Billionaire Thomas J. Barrack Jr. has done what few others in Trump's orbit have 
done: He told the president, in effect, that he was wrong. "In my opinion, he's better 
than this," Barrack said. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025125 
Trump's relationship with Barrack is one of the most important, if little understood, of 
the president's life, offering a case study of what it takes to remain close to him in a 
time of such turmoil. 
Read more »  
ADVERTISEMENT 
fitv-E, 
fitv-E, 
EZtar. 
.1-414 
You are signed up for the following breaking news alerts: Politics. 
You received this email because you signed up for breaking news alerts. Don't want to receive 
Trending Now alerts? Click here. For additional free email alerts and newsletters, or to 
unsubscribe, click here. 
We respect your privacy. If you believe that this email has been sent to you in error, or you no 
longer wish to receive email from The Washington Post, click here. Contact us for help. 
'7.47rVr. 
©2017 The Washington Post, 1301 K St NW, Washington DC 20071  
7.47rVr. 
41:-'17Az 
7.47rVr. 
41:-'17Az 
74176.P., 
7.4176.P., 
74176.P., 
7.47rVr. 
41:slAz 
MV-zarr. 
'7.47rVr. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025126 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025127
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #27
================================================================================
Date: 10/27/2017 3:46:57 PM
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's rhetoric
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lot of ruin in a nation 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:46 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
evangelicals confirmed in their belief of a divine hand. I kid you not. their view. how else ,could one 
explain DJT winning. To a person they never knew him. 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 11:10 AM, Larry Summers - wrote: 
Softbank deputy guy i liked and seemed aware and honest re Son. 
Lots of slathering to saudis. I yipped about inclusion. 
I observed that half the IQ In world was possessed by women without mentioning they are more than 51 
percent of population.... 
Mnuchin plumbs new depths. 
War seems more likely than I used to think 
DjT is world s luckiest guy in terms of opposition, economy etc. still think his world will collapse. 
I'm trying to figure why American elite think if u murder your baby by beating and abandonment it must be 
irrelevant to your admission to Harvard, but hit on a few women 10 years ago and can't work at a network or 
think tank. DO NOT REPEAT THIS INSIGHT 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:02 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025128 
anyone stand out. . ? when we meet I will endeavor to mesmerize you with stories of D.C. so wild. !!!. 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 10:59 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Was there. Spoke well. Spent time w Softbank deputy Najeev or some such PIF guy too. 
Flying back. 
How is life among the lucrative and louche? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office atl 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
From: jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Sent: Friday, October 27, 2017 6:51 PM 
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: Lawrence Summers '11 
' 
saudi? 
On Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 11:04 AM, Lawrence Summers <__________________________________> wrote: 
Your pal should stay out of press. 
Public link to manafort will be a disaster. 
This is a staggering shit show. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
----------Forwarded message---------- 
From: "The Washington Post" <emailge.washingtonpost.com> 
Date: Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 9:04 AM -0400 
Subject: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: "Summers, Lawrence H." < > 
I 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025129 
Democracy Dies in Darkness 
Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is  
'stunned' by president's rhetoric  
Billionaire Thomas J. Barrack Jr. has done what few others in Trump's orbit have 
done: He told the president, in effect, that he was wrong. "In my opinion, he's better 
than this," Barrack said. 
Trump's relationship with Barrack is one of the most important, if little understood, of 
the president's life, offering a case study of what it takes to remain close to him in a 
time of such turmoil. 
Read more »  
ADVERTISEMENT 
You are signed up for the following breaking news alerts: Politics. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025130 
You received this email because you signed up for breaking news alerts. Don't want to receive 
Trending Now alerts? Click here. For additional free email alerts and newsletters, or to 
unsubscribe, click here. 
We respect your privacy. If you believe that this email has been sent to you in error, or you no 
longer wish to receive email from The Washington Post, click here. Contact us for help. 
©2017 The Washington Post, 1301 K St NW, Washington DC 20071  
'7s7.41V., 
'7s7.41V., 
'7s7.4-Vt, 
'7s7.4-Vt, 
' 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
'7s7.4-Vt, 
'7s7.4-Vt, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025131 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025132
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #28
================================================================================
Date: 10/27/2017 3:59:04 PM
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's rhetoric
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hard to tell. 
General view Donald is a clown, increasingly dangerous on foreign policy. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:52 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
what was the consensus of your fellow attendees at the saudi conference. He, Donald belives everything is 
honky dorey. . especially after the flake concession. tax legislation, being put together by the 
committees. . all odd 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 11:46 AM, Larry Summers 1> wrote: 
Lot of ruin in a nation 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:46 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
evangelicals confirmed in their belief of a divine hand. I kid you not. their view. how else ,could one 
explain DJT winning. To a person they never knew him. 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 11:10 AM, Larry Summers wrote: 
Softbank deputy guy i liked and seemed aware and honest re Son. 
Lots of slathering to saudis. I yipped about inclusion. 
I observed that half the IQ In world was possessed by women without mentioning they are more than 51 
percent of population.... 
Mnuchin plumbs new depths. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025133 
War seems more likely than I used to think 
DjT is world s luckiest guy in terms of opposition, economy etc. still think his world will collapse. 
I'm trying to figure why American elite think if u murder your baby by beating and abandonment it must be 
irrelevant to your admission to Harvard, but hit on a few women 10 years ago and can't work at a network 
or think tank. DO NOT REPEAT THIS INSIGHT 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 7:02 PM +0400, "jeffrey E." <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
anyone stand out. . ? when we meet I will endeavor to mesmerize you with stories of 
D.C. so wild. !!!. 
On Fri, Oct 27, 2017 at 10:59 AM, Larry Summers <1=11> wrote: 
Was there. Spoke well. Spent time w Softbank deputy Najeev or some such PIF guy too. 
Flying back. 
How is life among the lucrative and louche? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
From: jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> 
Sent: Friday, October 27, 2017 6:51 PM 
Subject: Re: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by 
president's rhetoric 
To: Lawrence Summers < 
saudi? 
On Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 11:04 AM, Lawrence Summers < > wrote: 
Your pal should stay out of press. 
Public link to manafort will be a disaster. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025134 
This is a staggering shit show. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
----------Forwarded message---------- 
From: "The Washington Post" <emailge.washingtonpost.com> 
Date: Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 9:04 AM -0400 
Subject: Trending Now: Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is 'stunned' by president's 
rhetoric 
To: "Summers, Lawrence H." 
Democracy Dies in Darkness 
Trending Now 
Wed., Oct. 11, 2017 9:01 a.m. 
Friends for three decades, Trump whisperer says he is  
'stunned' by president's rhetoric  
Billionaire Thomas J. Barrack Jr. has done what few others in Trump's orbit have 
done: He told the president, in effect, that he was wrong. "In my opinion, he's better 
than this," Barrack said. 
Trump's relationship with Barrack is one of the most important, if little understood, of 
the president's life, offering a case study of what it takes to remain close to him in a 
time of such turmoil. 
Read more »  
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025135 
'ff•PEF, 
7e7AV., 
7e7A30,4 
You are signed up for the following breaking news alerts: Politics. 
You received this email because you signed up for breaking news alerts. Don't want to receive 
Trending Now alerts? Click here. For additional free email alerts and newsletters, or to 
unsubscribe, click here. 
We respect your privacy. If you believe that this email has been sent to you in error, or you no 
longer wish to receive email from The Washington Post, click here. Contact us for help. 
'ff•PEF, 
©2017 The Washington Post, 1301 K St NW, Washington DC 20071  
'ff•PEF, 
'ff•PEF, 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
glmg, 
'ff•PEF, 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025136 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025137 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 025138
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #29
================================================================================
Date: 12/2/2017 2:36:15 PM
Subject: Re: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein?
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
after DJT actually signs it. I'll point out the location of the other eggs much more creative - overall though, 
the writers were very sophisticated. they closed many many loopholes, and did it elegantly. example closing 
all the 1031 crazy transactions by merely inserting the word" real" in from of the word property very 
clever, or not redoing the paragraph but merely changing the penalty to zero. . or detailing related party 
definitions that had teeth. . they cant be faulted for not getting it right -100 percent :) 
On Sat, Dec 2, 2017 at 9:30 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
I don't know whether to laugh or cry 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 2, 2017, at 9:29 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
like the hunt for easter eggs. your friend andrew has so far only found one . and it was brighly colored:) 
On Sat, Dec 2, 2017 at 9:23 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
???? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: 
Date: December 2, 2017 at 8:16:13 AM EST 
To: Lawrence Henry Summers < 
Subject: Fwd: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein? 
Did you see this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026461 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Andrew Friendly <11111111> 
Date: December 2,  2017 at 7:29:07 AM EST 
To: . > 
Subject: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein? 
https://wwwfacebook.com/senatorsanders/videos/10156545332157908/ 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026462
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #30
================================================================================
Date: 12/2/2017 9:16:25 PM
Subject: Re: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein?
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comey himself acknowledged that: "throughout history, some presidents have decided that because 'problems' 
come from Justice, they should try to hold the Department close. But blurring those boundaries ultimately 
makes the problems worse by undermining public trust in the institutions and their work." Comey has also 
acknowledged that the president had the constitutional authority to fire him for any or no cause. 
President Trump also had the constitutional authority to order Comey to end the investigation of former national 
security adviser Mike Flynn. He could have pardoned Flynn, as Bush pardoned Weinberger, thus ending the 
Flynn investigation, as Bush ended the Iran-Contra investigation. What Trump could not do is what Nixon did: 
direct his aides to lie to the FBI, or commit other independent crimes. There is no evidence that Trump did that. 
On Sat, Dec 2, 2017 at 10:00 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Later 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 2, 2017, at 9:50 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
On Sat, Dec 2, 2017 at 9:30 AM, Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
I don't know whether to laugh or cry 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 2, 2017, at 9:29 AM, jeffrey E. <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
like the hunt for easter eggs. your friend andrew has so far only found one . and it was brighly colored:) 
On Sat, Dec 2, 2017 at 9:23 AM, Larry Summers < wrote: 
???? 
Sent from my iPhone 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026463 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Kelly Friendly <____________________ 
Date: December 2, 2017 at 8:16:13 AM EST 
To: Lawrence Henry Summers < 
Subject: Fwd: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein? 
Did you see this 
Kelly Friendly 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Andrew Friendly 
Date: December 2, 2017 at 7:29:07 AM EST 
To: Kelly Friendly <_________________________ 
Subject: A tax loophole for just Jeffrey Epstein? 
> 
https://wwwfacebook.com/senatorsanders/videos/10156545332157908/ 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026464 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026465
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #31
================================================================================
Date: 9/12/2018 3:01:20 AM
Subject: Fwd: This morning
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than u may want to know 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: "Maskin, Eric" 
Date: September 11, 2018 at 10:24:21 PM EDT 
To: LHS 
Subject: RE: This morning 
I believe there are, but don't know how careful they are. I will try to get you references. 
From: LHS < 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 10:23 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric <11 
Cc: lhsoffice 
Subject: Re: This morning 
Are there empirical studies on turnout. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Sep 11, 2018, at 10:20 PM, Maskin, Eric < > wrote: 
Yes, we can expect more extremists to run under RCV. But also more centrists (e.g., Bloomberg). Since the centrists are 
closer to the median voter, they will defeat the extremists. 
The evidence I have seen suggests that RCV increases turn-out. [But it's important that voters be given the choice to 
rank as many or few candidates as they like, so that a voter always has the option of voting for a single candidate (in 
effect, he would be ranking all other candidates as tied for second). In practice, most voters choose to rank two or three 
candidates, but a significant fraction just rank one] 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026321 
In fact the increase in the diversity of candidates under RCV is related to turn-out. If RCV had been used in 2016, Bernie 
Sanders could have run as an independent in the general election without fear of guaranteeing a Trump victory. Many 
of the Bernie supporters who stayed home on election day might then have voted---and presumably would have ranked 
Clinton second. This would have given her a victory over Trump in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania (and possibly 
elsewhere). 
Eric 
From: LHS ______________________________ 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 7:52 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric 
Cc: lhsoffice 
Subject: Re: This morning 
I get that formal argument 
What about aspects not quite in model. 
More folk will run from extremes if they can attract more First run votes. Candidates can position a bit. 
Separately I pitched this to someone today. 
He said he had heard that because of its greater complexity African American and lower income turnout was depressed. 
Is there evidence on turnout impacts? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @lhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
On Sep 11, 2018, at 6:05 PM, Maskin, Eric ____________________________________ wrote: 
Hi Larry, 
Thank you very much for taking the meeting this morning. I'm glad you found it worthwhile, and I agree with you that 
Adam Friedman's commitment to the project is impressive. 
I AM serious about working on this---it's a nice opportunity to make important practical use of some interesting theory. 
Voting rules may seem nerdy and dry, but they can make an enormous difference to actual politics 
The formal argument that RCV promotes centrism better than the current system (plurality rule) is straightforward. 
Suppose that most voters vote ideologically in the sense that the closer a candidate is to their own position on the left-
right spectrum, the more like they are to vote for him. Then under majority rule (my favorite voting system)---in which 
voters rank candidates and the winner is the candidate who beats all other in pairwise comparisons----the winner will be 
the median voter's favorite candidate -----in other words, the most centrist candidate gets elected (this assumes that 
there are enough candidates running so that there is one who is reasonably close to the median voter). Now observe 
that RCV is in between majority rule and plurality rule, and so will promote centrism better than plurality rule. 
Best wishes, Eric 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026322 
From: LHS ._____________________________________ 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 4:16 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric 
Cc: Ihsoffice 
Subject: This morning 
It was fun and interesting. 
I admire your friends determination. 
Are you serious about working on this? 
Has anyone done a full analysis of this and polarization. 
Seems like on one hand it might encourage Ralph Nader cuz he d get more first round votes and not elect George 
bush. This might be bad. 
On other hand, gore would not have to move left to take Nader vote. 
If I like centrism is it clear that this is better. 
I get that it avoids arbitrary outcomes but assume that a tea party nut is as likely to elect a dem as a lefty is to elect et a 
republican. 
Anyway thanks for setting up. 
Btw I gave them 10,000. 
Larry 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter @Ihsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026323
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #32
================================================================================
Date: 9/12/2018 6:15:20 PM
Subject: Re: This morning
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
https://www.cato-unbound.org/2016/12/13/jason-mcdaniel/ranked-choice-voting-likely-means-lower-turnout-
more-errors difficult to judge one way or the other. turnout, does not reflect ethnicity.? stable does not 
mean same. . looking at the argumnents on both sides , I would have to conclude in your words a big 
nothingburger 
On Wed, Sep 12, 2018 at 5:01 AM, Larry Summers < > wrote: 
More than u may want to know 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: "Maskin, Eric" < 
Date: September 11, 2018 at 10:24:21 PM EDT 
To: LHS < 
Subject: RE: This morning 
I believe there are, but don't know how careful they are. I will try to get you references. 
From: LHS 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 10:23 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric 
Cc: lhsoffice 
Subject: Re: This morning 
Are there empirical studies on turnout. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026508 
On Sep 11, 2018, at 10:20 PM, Maskin, Eric < wrote: 
Yes, we can expect more extremists to run under RCV. But also more centrists (e.g., Bloomberg). Since the 
centrists are closer to the median voter, they will defeat the extremists. 
The evidence I have seen suggests that RCV increases turn-out. [But it's important that voters be given the 
choice to rank as many or few candidates as they like, so that a voter always has the option of voting for a 
single candidate (in effect, he would be ranking all other candidates as tied for second). In practice, most voters 
choose to rank two or three candidates, but a significant fraction just rank one] 
In fact the increase in the diversity of candidates under RCV is related to turn-out. If RCV had been used in 
2016, Bernie Sanders could have run as an independent in the general election without fear of guaranteeing a 
Trump victory. Many of the Bernie supporters who stayed home on election day might then have voted---and 
presumably would have ranked Clinton second. This would have given lier a victory over Trump in Michigan, 
Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania (and possibly elsewhere). 
Eric 
From: LHS < 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 7:52 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric 
Cc: lhsoffice 
Subject: Re: This morning 
I get that formal argument 
What about aspects not quite in model. 
More folk will run from extremes if they can attract more First run votes. Candidates can position a bit. 
Separately I pitched this to someone today. 
He said he had heard that because of its greater complexity African American and lower income turnout was 
depressed. Is there evidence on turnout impacts? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026509 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Sep 11, 2018, at 6:05 PM, Maskin, Eric <I> wrote: 
Hi Larry, 
Thank you very much for taking the meeting this morning. I'm glad you found it worthwhile, and I agree with 
you that Adam Friedman's commitment to the project is impressive. 
I AM serious about working on this---it's a nice opportunity to make important practical use of some 
interesting theory. Voting rules may seem nerdy and dry, but they can make an enormous difference to actual 
politics 
The formal argument that RCV promotes centrism better than the current system (plurality rule) is 
straightforward. Suppose that most voters vote ideologically in the sense that the closer a candidate is to their 
own position on the left-right spectrum, the more like they are to vote for him. Then under majority rule (my 
favorite voting system)---in which voters rank candidates and the winner is the candidate who beats all other in 
pairwise comparisons----the winner will be the median voter's favorite candidate-----in other words, the most 
centrist candidate gets elected (this assumes that there are enough candidates running so that there is one who 
is reasonably close to the median voter). Now observe that RCV is in between majority rule and plurality rule, 
and so will promote centrism better than plurality rule. 
Best wishes, Eric 
From: LHS . 
MI ' 
Sent: Tuesday, September 11, 2018 4:16 PM 
To: Maskin, Eric 
Cc: lhsoffice 
Subject: This morning I 
It was fun and interesting. 
I admire your friends determination. 
Are you serious about working on this? 
Has anyone done a full analysis of this and polarization. 
Seems like on one hand it might encourage Ralph Nader cuz he d get more first round votes and not elect 
George bush. This might be bad. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026510 
On other hand, gore would not have to move left to take Nader vote. 
If I like centrism is it clear that this is better. 
I get that it avoids arbitrary outcomes but assume that a tea party nut is as likely to elect a dem as a lefty is to 
elect et a republican. 
Anyway thanks for setting up. 
Btw I gave them 10,000. 
Larry 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com  
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026511
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #33
================================================================================
Date: 11/20/2018 6:36:39 PM
Subject: Fwd:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Think no response for a while probably appropriate. 
Just had lunch w 
Is trump getting crazier as many of my pals think or is it steady crazy. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Keyu Jin <_____________________ 
Date: November 20, 2018 at 12:46:35 PM EST 
To: Larry Summers <I  
Did RA come back with answers to the yellow highlighted? did you take a look at the section that was written 
up? apart from your revision of intro there was the first section. 
Keyu Jin 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033418
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #34
================================================================================
Date: 11/20/2018 6:44:25 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
steady crazy , but now frightened.. yes quiet... lets see if the pace picks up or slows, she's already 
begining to sound needy :) nice 
On Tue, Nov 20, 2018 at 1:36 PM Larry Summers wrote: 
Think no response for a while probably appropriate. 
Just had lunch w Jamie D 
Is trump getting crazier as many of my pals think or is it steady crazy. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Keyu Jin________________________ 
Date: November 20, 2018 at 12:46:35 PM EST 
To: Larry Summers______________________ 
Did RA come back with answers to the yellow highlighted? did you take a look at the section that was written 
up? apart from your revision of intro there was the first section. 
Keyu Jin 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033391 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033392
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #35
================================================================================
Date: 11/21/2018 7:07:56 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
if you can hold out till tomorrow. and write something along the lines that when people talk about giving 
thnks , I think of how lucky i am to have met you . blah blah 
On Tue, Nov 20, 2018 at 1:36 PM Larry Summers wrote: 
Think no response for a while probably appropriate. 
Just had lunch w Jamie D 
Is trump getting crazier as many of my pals think or is it steady crazy. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Keyu Jin 
Date: November 20, 2018 at 12:46:35 PM EST 
To: Larry Summers 
Did RA come back with answers to the yellow highlighted? did you take a look at the section that was written 
up? apart from your revision of intro there was the first section. 
Keyu Jin 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033393 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033394
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #36
================================================================================
Date: 12/22/2018 12:52:50 PM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of course. Who knows whether I'm serious? Not at this moment me. 
Will trump crack into insanity? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 22, 2018, at 7:18 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
trump - borderline insane. dersh, a few feet further from the border but not by much 
On Sat, Dec 22, 2018 at 7:03 AM Larry Summers /rote: 
Sent 45 minutes after she sent an outline. 
I had sent a comment in mtg w her father flattering her father and saying other China officials had flattered him 
as well. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: lhsoffice@lawrencesummers.com 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Keyu Jin 
Date: December 22, 2018 at 12:49:20 AM EST 
To: Larry Summers 
I also wanted to say how grateful I am and have been for your support, and also your support of my father's 
work. I don't say these things often enough but it is I hope implied. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033426 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #37
================================================================================
Date: 12/22/2018 1:04:05 PM
Subject: Re:
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
this is not a new phenomenon for him. in the past he was told not to come out of his apt. thats how he got 
through near personal bankruptcy. is strength is remarkable. he is pounded 24/7. I hope someone close to 
him gets indicted , but not sure, otherwise the pressure of the unkown will force him to do crazy things. 
On Sat, Dec 22, 2018 at 7:54 AM Larry Summers_____________________________wrote: 
Of course. Who knows whether I'm serious? Not at this moment me. 
Will trump crack into insanity? 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 22, 2018, at 7:18 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
trump - borderline insane. dersh, a few feet further from the border but not by much 
On Sat, Dec 22, 2018 at 7:03 AM Larry Summer 
Sent 45 minutes after she sent an outline. 
wrote: 
I had sent a comment in mtg w her father flattering her father and saying other China officials had flattered 
him as well. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Keyu Jin 
Date: December 22, 2018 at 12:49:20 AM EST 
To: Larry Summers 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031800 
I also wanted to say how grateful I am and have been for your support, and also your support of my father's 
work. I don't say these things often enough but it is I hope implied. 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 031801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #38
================================================================================
Date: 1/4/2019 7:01:05 PM
Subject: Re:
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tmrw 
Modestly interesting developments re dear Abby issue. Quite confused. 
Trump seems about same 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Jan 4, 2019, at 1:24 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
back? 
On Wed, Dec 26, 2018 at 2:53 PM Larry Summers < 
Too bad 
Can we lock in next year now. 
Will only revert if Chinese dynamics require. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 26, 2018, at 2:51 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
not likely. ive gotten 6 so far, and was told after 4 no more 
wrote: 
On Wed, Dec 26, 2018 at 1:54 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
If i want to go can u get me invited. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026329 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.corn 
On Dec 26, 2018, at 8:36 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
davos nothing personal-- trying to bring more sitting rather than former. demand 150% of past for 
attendance. 
On Tue, Dec 25, 2018 at 1:37 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
I 11 call sometime today. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 25, 2018, at 1:29 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
561 655 7626 
On Tue, Dec 25, 2018 at 1:06 PM Larry Summers 
What number r u at? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 25, 2018, at 9:26 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
being asked for 3 names to replace mnuchin 
On Fri, Dec 21, 2018 at 8:23 PM Larry Summers < 
Will 
Call tonite or at some point. 
Will u be visiting Mara Lago. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.corn 
> wrote: 
> wrote: 
On Dec 21, 2018, at 7:01 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026330 
im in palm beach all weekend 
1 
On Fri, Dec 21, 2018 at 6:42 PM Larry Summers < 
Yup. Want to discuss the Donald at some point 
Curious re Dersh 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
> wrote: 
On Dec 21, 2018, at 6:29 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you back? 
On Sat, Dec 15, 2018 at 9:00 PM Larry Summers < 
Is calling from here prudent 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:__________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 16, 2018, at 1:52 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Ok 
On Sat, Dec 15, 2018 at 12:27 PM Larry Summers < 
In China. Too much talk may be mistake. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
> wrote: 
> wrote: 
On Dec 15, 2018, at 10:38 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
561 655 7626 
On Fri, Dec 14, 2018 at 6:12 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
She wants no contact except re article 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026331 
I'm having very good time w lisa 
I'm avoiding contact 
I'm off to China. Told her. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 15, 2018, at 10:07 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
news? 
On Sat, Dec 1, 2018 at 1:52 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Call me or give number 
She did well was mostly into that 
Took my suggestions re her talk 
Interested in my commentary on her outfits 
Was appreciative but seemed very dry eyed on my message re marriage pigheaded etc 
I referenced your having figured us out told me to be fair and got me thinking 
Suspects she thinks richer dialog between us. 
Think cooling off while I'm away is good thing 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 1, 2018, at 1:34 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026332 
On Sat, Dec 1, 2018 at 10:38 AM LHS < > wrote: 
Yup 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 1, 2018, at 10:31 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
well your debating tips obviously worked as ? youre fucked , was my expression inserted as one to 
remember:) 
On Sat, Dec 1, 2018 at 10:29 AM LHS < > wrote: 
Game day at conference she was extremely good 
Smart 
Assertive and clear 
Gorgeous. 
I'm fucked. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 1, 2018, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
thanking her for fortitude in dealing with what has obvioulsy been a tough situation. and 
acknowlegin both how difficult it has been coupled with your mate insensitivty. and 
apologizing for not fully recogbnizing how difficult it has been 1 
On Sat, Dec 1, 2018 at 9:08 AM LHS > wrote: 
I sent a note just asking her to txt when she was up cuz I had something brief to say to her. 
Didn't want to push cuz she takes her 930 presentation here very seriously. 
Better after her talk. 
Am I thanking her or being sorry re my being married. I think the former. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026333 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Dec 1, 2018, at 8:57 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
results? 
On Fri, Nov 30, 2018 at 10:54 PM LHS < > wrote: 
What number? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 30, 2018, at 10:53 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
once you decide which way, we can set it up with option to purchase 
On Fri, Nov 30, 2018 at 10:46 PM LHS < > wrote: 
You were good. 
Thought if u didn't know that we had been a couple she gave it away w familiarity and barbed 
comments. 
Think for now I'm going nowhere with her except economics mentor. 
I think I'm right now in the seen very warmly in rear view mirror category. 
She did not want to have a drink cuz she was "tired" 
I left the hotel lobby somewhat abruptly. 
When I'm reflective I think I'm dodging a bullet. There are huge ups with her but very self 
involved and to get her to be good probably requires more firmness than I enjoy. 
Think right thing is to cut off contact. Suspect she will miss it. Problem is I will too. 
Sent from my iPad 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026334 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 30, 2018, at 10:35 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
im a pretty good wing man , no? anymore, how great larry is comments and i would have 
had to barf. great fun 
On Thu, Nov 29, 2018 at 4:48 PM LHS < 
Is there risk that u are staked our re tmrw night 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
> wrote: 
On Nov 29, 2018, at 4:47 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
short lived , no worry 
On Thu, Nov 29, 2018 at 4:45 PM LHS < 
I 11 show it to her. 
U have returned to the press 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Nov 29, 2018, at 3:07 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026335 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
<137cae2c-8e79-4ab3-895a-134381421cc0-1.MP4> 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026336 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026337 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026338 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026339 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026340 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 026341
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #39
================================================================================
Date: 3/16/2019 9:38:20 PM
Subject: Re: Disaster but maybe i
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figuring out how. 
Could say she has now used up 80 percent of what she was owed through my changes in plan. 
Or say xi changes meeting w trump. 
I think she is tired of this alas. 
Sustaining w secrecy hard. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 5:27 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Firm delivered through humor 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 5:16 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
No I meant that thanking her will be wierd because we had 45 minutes of friendly convo before the bit I 
described. 
I'll wait till tmrw and send her some article and then say some version of your msg. 
At some point need more firmness though. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 5:10 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
And? 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 4:33 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Doesnt work I talked to her for 45 minutes. 
Sent from my iPhone 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029611 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 4:16 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Just send, happy for the time we spent together- have fun see you soon 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 3:57 PM Larry Summers , 
I'm really mad at the deception. 
Should I just wait for her to call? 
> wrote: 
This guy different. Maybe married or old or something. I sense from body language she is really attracted but 
he is unsuitable as partner. 
I can hardly be possessive under circumstances but schedule changing because she gets a better offer is not 
acceptable. 
If I say this she will rage back about times I changed plans because of family and work constraints. 
She knew I was upset. I think significant chance she 11 send note saying this may not be fair to you why 
Not take time off or that she will say this. 
In her way very tough. 
But nothing for now. 
R from my iPhone 
Larry 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 3:19 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
shes smart. making you pay for past errors.. ignore the daddy im going to go out with the 
motorcycle guy, . you reacted well.. annoyed shows caring. , no whining showed strentgh. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029612 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 3:08 PM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
We talked on phone. Then "I can't talk later". Dint think I can talk tomorrow". 
I said what are you up to. She said "I'm busy". I said awfully coy u are. 
And then I said. Did u really rearrange the weekend we were going to be together because guy number 3 
was coming" 
She said no his schedule changed after we changed our plans. 
I said ok I got to go call me when u feel like it. Tone was not of good feeling. 
I dint want to be in a gift giving competition while being the friend without benefits. 
Think time to just stay away for a while. If there is potential here she 11 find way back. 
I think I'm too eager weak at this point. The Prada thing by someone else is natural. By me seems 
desperate. 
Had good sense not to send off a note. 
She must be very confused or maybe wants to cut me off but wants professional connection a lot and so 
holds to it. 
I think life as stand by in case she needs leverage against another guy sucks. 
But I get when I think about it stay cool. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 2:10 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
how was it communicated to you? 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 1:59 PM Larry Summers < 
guy 3 seems to be in London for weekend which is why my visit cut short. 
I got mad. Didn't send angry note after call though. 
This is a ridiculous activity. 
Sent from my iPhone 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029613 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029614 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029615
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #40
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 1:56:54 AM
Subject: Re: Disaster but maybe i
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not funny 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 7:07 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you could say something like . try not to call him larry by mistake.. though it would be amusing. 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 5:38 PM Larry Summers • wrote: 
Figuring out how. 
Could say she has now used up 80 percent of what she was owed through my changes in plan. 
Or say xi changes meeting w trump. 
I think she is tired of this alas. 
Sustaining w secrecy hard. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 5:27 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Firm delivered through humor 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 5:16 PM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
No I meant that thanking her will be wierd because we had 45 minutes of friendly convo before the bit I 
described. 
I'll wait till tmrw and send her some article and then say some version of your msg. 
At some point need more firmness though. 
Sent from my iPhone 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029616 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 5:10 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
And? 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 4:33 PM Larry Summers < 
Doesnt work I talked to her for 45 minutes. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
> wrote: 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 4:16 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
Just send, happy for the time we spent together- have fun see you soon 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 3:57 PM Larry Summers 
I'm really mad at the deception. 
Should I just wait for her to call? 
> wrote: 
This guy different. Maybe married or old or something. I sense from body language she is really attracted 
but he is unsuitable as partner. 
I can hardly be possessive under circumstances but schedule changing because she gets a better offer is not 
acceptable. 
If I say this she will rage back about times I changed plans because of family and work constraints. 
She knew I was upset. I think significant chance she 11 send note saying this may not be fair to you why 
Not take time off or that she will say this. 
In her way very tough. 
But nothing for now. 
R from my iPhone 
Larry 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029617 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office atl 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 3:19 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
shes smart. making you pay for past errors.. ignore the daddy im going to go out with the 
motorcycle guy, . you reacted well.. annoyed shows caring. , no whining showed strentgh. 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 3:08 PM Larry Summers ‹> wrote: 
We talked on phone. Then "I can't talk later". Dint think I can talk tomorrow". 
I said what are you up to. She said "I'm busy". I said awfully coy u are. 
And then I said. Did u really rearrange the weekend we were going to be together because guy number 3 
was coming" 
She said no his schedule changed after we changed our plans. 
I said ok I got to go call me when u feel like it. Tone was not of good feeling. 
I dint want to be in a gift giving competition while being the friend without benefits. 
Think time to just stay away for a while. If there is potential here shell find way back. 
I think I'm too eager weak at this point. The Prada thing by someone else is natural. By me seems 
desperate. 
Had good sense not to send off a note. 
She must be very confused or maybe wants to cut me off but wants professional connection a lot and so 
holds to it. 
I think life as stand by in case she needs leverage against another guy sucks. 
But I get when I think about it stay cool. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029618 
On Mar 16, 2019, at 2:10 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
how was it communicated to you? 
On Sat, Mar 16, 2019 at 1:59 PM Larry Summers_________________________> wrote: 
guy 3 seems to be in London for weekend which is why my visit cut short. 
I got mad. Didn't send angry note after call though. 
This is a ridiculous activity. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029619 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029620 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 029621
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #41
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 1:45:22 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you cant 
retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will appreciate 
whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this person. you might 
want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. . its like trump firing comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:__________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending - BAD 
FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you have laid out 
- this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could be . yours.. are 
essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and yours is infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers <_> wrote: 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her bad 
behavior. 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033435 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033436
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #42
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 3:48:09 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:49 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
coming from you -- not mutually exclusive 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:45 AM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you 
cant retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will appreciate 
whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this person. you might 
want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. . its like trump firing comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers ‹> wrote: 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:__________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033437 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending - BAD 
FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you have laid 
out - this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could be . yours.. 
are essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and yours is 
infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers < 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
> wrote: 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her bad 
behavior. 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033438 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033439
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #43
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 4:24:05 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That is true. 
Interesting. I take a serious note from someone as a deed not words. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:17 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you can be both thoughtful and face to face 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 11:48 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
?.. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:49 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
coming from you -- not mutually exclusive 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:45 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033440 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you 
cant retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will appreciate 
whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this person. you might 
want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. . its like trump firing comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers < 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
> wrote: 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending - BAD 
FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you have laid 
out - this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could be . yours.. 
are essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and yours is 
infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her 
bad behavior. 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033441 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033442 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033443
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #44
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 6:16:22 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I hear you. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:26 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
last i looked ( sic), you do not have ovaries. 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 12:24 PM Larry Summers < 
That is true. 
Interesting. I take a serious note from someone as a deed not words. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:17 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you can be both thoughtful and face to face 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 11:48 AM Larry Summers <_____________ 
?.. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:49 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
coming from you -- not mutually exclusive 
wrote: 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033444 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:45 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you 
cant retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will 
appreciate whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this 
person. you might want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. . its like trump firing 
comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending - BAD 
FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you have laid 
out - this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could be . yours.. 
are essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and yours is 
infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her 
bad behavior. 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033445 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033446 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033447
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #45
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 8:35:34 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: larry summers
To: jeevacation@gmail.com
Direction: larry summers → jeevacation@gmail.com
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Home Boston. Will try to call 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 4:21 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
where are you? 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 2:16 PM Larry Summers < 
I hear you. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:26 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
last i looked ( sic), you do not have ovaries. 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 12:24 PM Larry Summers < 
That is true. 
Interesting. I take a serious note from someone as a deed not words. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:17 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
you can be both thoughtful and face to face 
> wrote: 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033448 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 11:48 AM Larry Summers > wrote: 
?.. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:49 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
coming from you -- not mutually exclusive 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:45 AM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you 
cant retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will 
appreciate whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this 
person. you might want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. its like trump firing 
comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending 
- BAD FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you 
have laid out - this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033449 
be . yours.. are essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and 
yours is infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers <___________________________> wrote: 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her 
bad behavior. 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033450 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033451 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033452
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


================================================================================
EMAIL #46
================================================================================
Date: 3/17/2019 10:18:39 PM
Subject: Re: Call from New Yorker.
From: jeevacation@gmail.com
To: larry summers
Direction: jeevacation@gmail.com → larry summers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Helen fisher- anatomy of love - you might find amusing 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 4:35 PM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Home Boston. Will try to call 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 4:21 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
where are you? 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 2:16 PM Larry Summers < 
I hear you. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:26 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
last i looked ( sic), you do not have ovaries. 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 12:24 PM Larry Summers 
That is true. 
Interesting. I take a serious note from someone as a deed not words. 
Sent from my iPhone 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at:___________________ 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 12:17 PM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
> wrote: 
> wrote: 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033405 
you can be both thoughtful and face to face 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 11:48 AM Larry Summers ‹> wrote: 
?.. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:49 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
coming from you -- not mutually exclusive 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:45 AM Larry Summers <____________________________> wrote: 
Hmmm. 
I think sometimes written communication shows seriousness of thought but see your point 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 9:11 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
this is only the first quarter of the game. if you call a time out, its on the field and done with dignity, you 
cant retreat into the locker room and send a note to the opposing side. in the next quarter she will 
appreciate whatever you've said with respect and founded on strength. you care very much for this 
person. you might want to demonstrate that. a note does the very opposite. . its like trump firing 
comey. :) 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 9:01 AM Larry Summers <____________________________> wrote: 
It was latter. Why bad form. Supposed to be face to face? 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:54 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
unclear if you meant you ve written notes to yourself re exit or a note you were thinking of sending 
- BAD FORM if latter. you both have still not agreed the rules of the game. so difficult to play . you 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033406 
have laid out - this is what i want. . but actually, how it would work, and what her freedoms are. could 
be . yours.. are essential to the plan. I think much of this is your uncertainty and not hers. sorry. and 
yours is infectious 
On Sun, Mar 17, 2019 at 8:48 AM Larry Summers < > wrote: 
Ok. Best to make reversible errors 
I've written note for exit strategy 1. Not going to send for few days. 
Going to treat it all as a game till I maybe see her in Beijing and out of character ignore and look past her 
bad behavior. 
Best to stop obsessing. 
Sent from my iPad 
Please direct all scheduling inquiries to my office at: 
Follow me on twitter glhsummers 
www.larrysummers.com 
On Mar 17, 2019, at 8:42 AM, J <jeevacation@gmail.com> wrote: 
COM 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033407 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033408 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
please note 
The information contained in this communication is 
confidential, may be attorney-client privileged, may 
constitute inside information, and is intended only for 
the use of the addressee. It is the property of 
JEE 
Unauthorized use, disclosure or copying of this 
communication or any part thereof is strictly prohibited 
and may be unlawful. If you have received this 
communication in error, please notify us immediately by 
return e-mail or by e-mail to jeevacation@gmail.com, and 
destroy this communication and all copies thereof, 
including all attachments. copyright -all rights reserved 
HOUSE OVERSIGHT 033409
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

