The Africa Corps ( Russian : Африканский корпус , romanized : Afrikanskiy korpus ) is a Russian paramilitary organization established by the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation (MoD) , which serves as an expeditionary force designed to advanced Russian strategic, economic, and geopolitical interests in Africa . The corps largely took over the operations of the Wagner Group in Africa, by subsuming and rebranding its structures.

History

The Africa Corps was established by the Russian Ministry of Defence , soon after the death of Wagner's leadership in 2023, when a plane with its leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin , crashed in Tver Oblast . In doing so, the MoD made way for a full government takeover of the PMC scene in Russia, after the prior rivalry between the Russian MoD and Wagner.

The Corps' name alludes to a German expeditionary force with the same name under Nazi Germany, the Afrika Korps , which was deployed to North Africa during World War II .

The formation cooperates with other government-controlled structures, like the " Bears Brigade " in Africa. Konstantin Mirzayants, a purported leader of Redut, is reportedly closely involved in the MoD's operations in Africa and the creation of the Africa Corps.

The UK Defence Ministry claimed that the Africa Corps was also deployed in the 2024 Kharkiv offensive during the Russo-Ukrainian war .

Organization

The Corps' creation is part of a broader Russian strategy to increase its influence in Africa, where it competes with the United States as part of a broader geopolitical rivalry . The Africa Corps operates through a mix of mercenaries and volunteers, and estimates of its size vary.

The Africa Corps has a smaller and more integrated role compared to Wagner, focusing on providing military support, training, and urban counterterrorism cooperation with local Russia-aligned governments in countries like Libya , Mali , Burkina Faso , Niger , and the Central African Republic . The Russian government aims to use this entity to project influence, filling the security vacuum left by the withdrawal of Western powers , especially France , from the Sahel region. Russia also seeks to gain control over strategic resources like uranium , particularly in Niger, as well as leverage migration routes for geopolitical purposes.

Sanctions

In November 2024, the United Kingdom sanctioned the Africa Corps along with the Espanola formation and 81st Special Forces Brigade . According to British foreign secretary David Lammy , the goal is to "counter illegal Russian activities, hinder the destabilisation of African countries and to interrupt supply for the Russian war effort in Ukraine".

Activities

Main areas

- Africa: Alliance of Sahel States ( Mali , Burkina Faso , and Niger ), Libya , and the Central African Republic
- Europe: Ukraine and Russia

By country

Mali

In December 2024, the Russian Ministry of Defence deployed 1,000 soldiers from the Africa Corps to Mali, while 1,500 from the Wagner Group commanded by Ruslan Sergeevich Zlobin were still there. The Wagnerians were deployed mainly in the north of the country, while the Africa Corps was concentrated in Bamako and the centre.

On 6 June 2025, the government-controlled Wagner Group announced leaving Mali, with the Africa Corps continuing Russian operations to back the Malian military junta. The Africa Corps then became the only Russian force present in the country. Several Wagner leaders, however, moved over to the Africa Corps with some of their men, including Andrei Ivanov, known as "Kep", Ruslan Zaprudsky, known as "Rusich" and Alexander Kuznetsov, known as "Ratibor". According to US officials, around 2,000 soldiers of both paramilitary groups were located in Mali.

According to some Malian refugees, the Africa Corps has committed atrocities such as burning down of villages, gang rape and sexual slavery, and other abuses such as beheadings and abductions. In early December 2025, a 14-year-old girl claimed to be raped by Africa Corps fighters who burst into her family's tent in Mali.

On 21 April 2026, the Russian Ministry of Defence reported that the corps rescued two employees of a Russian geological exploration company who were abducted by Jama'at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin in Niger two years earlier. Four days later, on 25 April, a helicopter belonging to the corps was shot down by the Azawad Liberation Front with both the crew and mobile fire group being transported by it killed during the 2026 Mali attacks .

Following the attacks, the Africa Corps abandoned Kidal .

Burkina Faso

On 24 January 2024, military personnel of Russia's Africa Corps, which were intended to replace Wagner, arrived in Burkina Faso to provide security, including for interim president Ibrahim Traoré . It was reportedly planned that the 100 personnel would be expanded to 300. It was revealed that a military base for the Africa Corps was established in Loumbila , north-east of Burkina Faso's capital Ouagadougou .

Central African Republic

In early 2025, Russia demanded that the Central African Republic (CAR) should switch from remaining Wagner forces to the African Corps. By mid-2025, Africa Corps replaced Wagner group personnel in CAR.

Madagascar

The Russian delegation headed by the Africa Corps, met in December 2025 with Madagascar’s interim president, Michael Randrianirina . During the meeting, the delegation and Randrianrina negotiated about personal protection for the president. In January 2026, Russia sent military equipment and personnel to train the Madagascar Armed Forces .

--- INFOBOX ---

Африканский корпус
Founded: 2023–present
Allegiance: Russia
Size: Mali ~1, 000 , Central African Republic ~1, 500–2, 000 , Libya ~800–1, 200 , Niger ~100 , Burkina Faso ~300 , Equatorial Guinea ~200
Part of: Ministry of Defence
Engagements: War in the Sahel Mali War 2026 Mali offensives
Website: https://africancorpus.ru/
Current commander: Lt. Gen. Andrey Averyanov