Thuggee was a phenomenon of highway robbery in the Indian subcontinent that saw gangs of thugs (sometimes spelled thags ) traverse the region murdering and robbing travellers, often by strangling. During the British colonial era , thuggee was portrayed and popularised as a secret pan-Indian fraternity of ritual stranglers with ancient origins, motivated by fanaticism and bloodlust. This representation has come under intense scholarly criticism since the 1950s, with historians' reinterpretations generally contesting the significance of religion to thuggee and viewing the thugs as more or less ordinary criminals, or thuggee as a type of banditry .

The thuggee phenomenon came to prominence in the early 19th century, during the expansion of Company rule in India . In the 1830s, colonial administrator William Henry Sleeman led a policing campaign against thuggee that saw the Thuggee Department formally established in 1835, alongside legal developments that facilitated convictions. Sleeman authored works on thuggee and, together with his colleagues, recorded interviews with approvers , which underpinned the colonial-era representation and constitute the vast majority of sources on the phenomenon. Thuggee was portrayed by the colonial authorities as 'hereditary criminality' and the campaign served as a precedent for the 1871 Criminal Tribes Act .

Historians' reinterpretations vary as to the actual nature of the phenomenon. The historical revisionism has highlighted the variety of individuals arrested over the course of the campaign and generally places the thugs in the context of chaos and disruption amidst the decline of the Mughal Empire that was exacerbated by the expansion of British rule . A theory that has gained traction among historians views the phenomenon as resulting from a decline in the military labour market brought about by the British conquest and the East India Company 's disbandment of native standing armies . The theory holds that some disbanded soldiers and itinerant mercenary bands turned to highway robbery as the market contracted. Scholars have variously described the 19th-century representation as an invention or distortion of the Company regime that legitimised colonial rule and saw the Company extend its control over its Indian subjects.

Following the publication of the 1839 novel Confessions of a Thug , thuggee became a Victorian sensation. Notable depictions in modern popular fiction include the 1984 film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom .

Etymology and nomenclature

Thug ( Hindustani : ठग ; ٹھگ ) translates to ' swindler ' or 'deceiver' and is derived from the Sanskrit word स्थग ( sthaga ) meaning 'to cover' or 'to conceal'. The earliest generally accepted use of the word dates to 1350 and it was sometimes used in precolonial India, in the same sense as the later British usage, to refer to highway robbers that deceived and murdered their victims. This was not the only meaning of the term, with its literal interpretation not necessarily connoting an association with violence. In 1820, a British magistrate stated in his report that in the Western Provinces "the word Thug is a local cant term and consequently little understood in any uniform way".

The English word thug is a loanword from the same roots. The word phansigar ( फाँसीगार ; پھانسی گار ) literally meaning 'strangler' was used interchangeably with 'thug' during the 19th century and tended to be the term used in the Madras Presidency . Thuggee refers to the practise of thugs and the crime itself.

History

Possible precolonial accounts

During his travels across India in the 7th century, the Chinese monk Hsüen Tsang was attacked by pirates on the Ganges and narrowly escaped being sacrificed to Durga . On another occasion, Hsüen Tsang was told while passing a temple on the way to Pataliputra that no foreigner who entered it ever came out again. The 19th century archaeologist Alexander Cunningham claimed to have identified the temple and presented this as an early account of thuggee. Kim A. Wagner asserts the view that, by this rationale, every account of banditry and human sacrifice in ancient India could be linked to the thugs of the 19th century. According to a 14th-century chronicle by Ziauddin Barani , Sultan Jalal-ud-Din Khalji deported 1,000 arrested 'thags' from Delhi to Bengal in 1290, however the chronicle makes no mention of what they were arrested for. The 15th–16th century poet Surdas wrote of a 'thag' luring a pilgrim with sweets and wine and then murdering and robbing them.

Following his travels across India in 1666–1667, Jean de Thévenot wrote in 1684 of the "cunningest robbers in the world" operating in the Delhi area that strangled their victims with a running noose and used attractive women to lure travellers. In 1672, the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb issued a farman specifying the punishment to be meted out to stranglers, including those that were "habituated to the work" or were notorious for it among the local population. John Fryer wrote of his experience in 1675 witnessing the execution of fifteen members of a bandit gang near Surat that had strangled and robbed passing travellers using a cotton bowstring . Around 1680, an Indian news-writer for the Waqa'i Ajmer referred to "highway robbers known in Hindi as thags " in Rajputana . In 1785, James Forbes recounted how an Indian acquaintance had witnessed the arrest of several men that belonged to a tribe he referred to as phanseegurs , describing how they would deceive and strangle travellers. A 1797 tax list prepared for Maharaja Daulat Rao Sindhia lists 318 houses as belonging to thugs, who were subjected to a soldier tax. The list was obtained by a British official and covers 20 villages across the parganas of Parihara and Sursae .

Colonial era

Etawah crisis (1809–1811)

The British colonial authorities first encountered what they would come to refer to as thuggee in Southern India in 1807 and in Northern India in 1809. In April 1809, ten bodies were discovered in a well in the Etawah district ( newly ceded in 1801), with the Magistrate of Etawah James Law tasked with investigating the killings. After Law's inquiries proved unsuccessful, and following the discovery of four strangled native soldiers in July, the magistrates of the neighbouring Aligarh and Farrukhabad districts were brought in to assist. In November, Law's assistant made the first officially recorded reference to 'Thugs', describing them as "a set of people... who have from time immemorial carried on their abominable and lamentable practices" in secret.

Following the discovery of two strangled travellers in December and the initiation of a more thorough investigation, Law wrote: "It is presumed that the murdered persons were travellers and fell victims to that detestable race of monsters called T,ugs [ sic ]... they are so strongly leagued together, that scarcely an instance has ever been known of their having betrayed each others secrets." More bodies were discovered throughout December and early 1810, in the midst of which Law was removed from his post. When questioned by an investigation in February, local zamindars reported that the perpetrators were suspected to be "Thugs".

Between 1808 and 1809, a total of 67 bodies were discovered in wells and along the highways of Etawah, with a further 11 discovered in early 1810 between Mainpuri and Agra . Law's replacement, Thomas Perry, offered a large reward of Rs 1,000 for information leading to the arrest of the perpetrators. After eight suspected Thugs were arrested in March 1810, a young member of the gang, Ghulam Hussain, agreed to testify in return for a pardon and claimed that there were some 1,500 Thugs based in Etawah. Hussain stated that he had been adopted by the gang as a child after they had murdered his father and uncle. The remaining prisoners initially admitted to murdering travellers over many years. At the trial in Mainpuri in November, he demonstrated for the court how the gang strangled their victims, though the trial descended into a farce as Hussain repeatedly revised his testimony regarding the extent of his involvement with the gang. He ultimately claimed to have been on five expeditions, witnessing 95 murders. However, the court rejected his testimony due to repeated perjury and it was later deemed inadmissible to try him for the murders he had confessed to participating in. Perry was forced to release the suspects and was later admonished by the Nizamat Adalat (the Company's supreme court ) for holding 162 suspected Thugs without due evidence.

1810s and 1820s

Regulation VI of 1810 first referred to Thugs as a distinct criminal category, alongside Dacoits , Cozauks, and Buddecks. That same year, the Superintendent of Police for the Western Provinces was established to apprehend Dacoits, Cozauks, and, especially, Thugs. Though many individuals were convicted and sentenced to death by the circuit courts in the early attempts to combat thuggee, all the cases were ultimately dismissed by the Nizamat Adalat due to them being based solely on suspected Thugs' confessions. In October 1812, Nathaniel J. Halhed was tasked with introducing British law and order into the thana of Sindouse (located in the pargana of Parihara, southernmost Etawah), where Thugs were allegedly retained by local zamindars. After ordering the surrounding villages to disarm, Halhed's party was ambushed by the villagers and a British officer killed, for which the village of Murnae was razed the following month. The operation caused the Thugs to disperse into neighbouring Maratha territory. In a December report on the state of the pargana, Halhed objected to characterisations of the Thugs as a " secret society similar to the Illuminati ", stating:

> They are no more than a species of robber whose policy consists in murdering the person they rob and can seldom be convicted from want of evidence to corroborate their confessions which they in general will make before a magistrate because they themselves attach no idea of dishonour to this their profession.

Following the 1812 operation, successive Superintendents of Police for the Western Provinces claimed in their reports that thuggee activity had decreased in Etawah, Aligarh, and Cawnpore in the central Doab and simultaneously increased in Allahabad and Bundelkhand , migrating southwards and eastwards. In his yearly report for 1815, Superintendent John Shakespeare addressed that "much scepticism still prevails regarding the existence of any distinct class of people who are designated T'hegs", though he himself held no doubt that there were "regular societies" of Thugs, who he characterised as robbers. In his five classes of Thugs, Shakespeare included Bairagi and Gosain mendicants that drugged and robbed travellers.

Regulation VIII of 1818 effectively allowed notorious Dacoits to be held indefinitely, with Regulation III of 1819 extending its provisions to also apply to Thugs. In the 1820s the colonial authorities began to adopt a new strategy of handing captured thugs over to local rulers and chiefs to circumvent the British colonial legal system and convict them by proxy. The first Thugs were convicted in Saugor in 1826, whereby two were sentenced to be hanged and a further 29 sentenced to transportation for life. This was possible due to Saugor and Nerbudda being established in 1818 as 'Non-Regulation Territories', meaning that the Agent at Saugor could operate outside the usual Company regulations with virtually unlimited powers. In 1829 in the Bombay Presidency , two Thugs were sentenced to hanging, six to transportation, and one to life imprisonment for the murder of six men carrying Rs 100,000 of valuables in February.

Centralised campaign (1829–1839)

Later that year, the Agent at Mahidpur Captain William Borthwick arrested 74 Thugs for the murder of five travellers. Up until this point, efforts to combat thuggee had been led by local authorities and the case marked the first time the central government intervened to ensure that the Thugs were convicted and to develop a judicial argument that saw Thugs treated in the same vein as pirates . In an October 1829 letter, the Government stated that this was because the murders had taken place in territories belonging to various Native Chiefs, meaning that there wasn't one particular authority that could try them. Forty of the Thugs were hanged, 20 sentenced to transportation for life, and a further 12 received limited sentences. Chief Secretary to the Government George Swinton proposed that an officer be placed in charge of five approvers (the period term for informants ) and tasked exclusively with apprehending Thugs, with the Agent at Bundelkhand selected to inspect villages in cooperation with the village chiefs .

Captain William Henry Sleeman , as assistant to the Agent at Jubbulpore , began assigning approvers that he had in custody to escort detachments of troops along exposed routes, and his methods led to the arrests of 24 Thugs in 1830. Sleeman and Borthwick's arrests led to an extensive exchange of information between officials and the sharing of approvers, resulting in a spate of arrests over the course of 1830. In October, Sleeman contributed an anonymous letter to the Calcutta Literary Gazette entitled ' Thugs ' that recounted the execution of 11 Thugs and asserted that Thugs were fanatical worshippers of a tutelary goddess under the names " Davey , Kalee , Doorga , and Bhowanee ". The letter also asserted that the Thugs were headquartered at Vindhyachal Temple near Mirzapur , where their expeditions were planned by the temple priests . It further provided details on the alleged religious nature of thuggee and demanded that the government "put an end in some way or other to this dreadful system of murder, by which thousands of human beings are now annually sacrificed upon every great road throughout India".

The letter made an impression on the Government, with Swinton writing the following day that the destruction of "this Tribe would... be a blessing conferred on the people of India" comparable to the abolition of sati . Swinton was the prime instigator within the Government of efforts to combat thuggee and, while the author of the letter remained anonymous, Sleeman was appointed Agent at Saugor later that month. Agent for the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories Francis Curwen Smith submitted a plan in November that he had written with Sleeman and which called for an officer to be appointed Superintendent for the Suppression of Thugs, who would send Thugs to be tried in the Saugor and Nerbudda courts. The report marked the first portrayal of thuggee as an irredeemable identity rooted in bloodlust. Governor-General Lord William Bentinck declined to establish a specific office for thuggee, though he provided Sleeman with 50 barkandazes to pursue and apprehend the gangs. The October 1829 letter was cited by Smith and Sleeman as recognising a new jurisdiction under the Company's Political Department and establishing the principle of British paramountcy regarding the trial of Thugs in native states .

Smith, in his capacity as Commissioner of the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories, oversaw the thuggee trials while Sleeman was appointed Superintendent of the operations, whereby approvers were sent out with detachments of troops to disinter bodies and point out their former associates, with the campaign's supply of approvers growing as more Thugs were caught. In November 1830, Sleeman captured the thuggee gang leader Feringheea after holding his relatives captive, whereafter he became Sleeman's most valuable approver. From 1830 onwards, the Government ordered Thugs sentenced to imprisonment to be branded with the Godna on a part of the body exposed to view, typically the forehead. In 1832 and 1833 officials were despatched to the Doab and Rajputana respectively to oversee anti-thuggee operations there. Thugs were convicted based on circumstantial evidence and approver testimony and, between 1832 and 1833, 145 Thugs were hanged, 323 sentenced to deportation, and 41 given life in prison by the Saugor and Nerbudda courts. Sleeman played different thuggee factions off of one another to secure approver testimony, exploiting the varying loyalties between different families and castes within the gangs, such as between Hindu and Muslim thugs.

In 1834, Smith began to call for a central agency for the suppression of thuggee that would station officials in more territories. Backed by an official report, the Government established the Thuggee Department in January 1835 and appointed Sleeman 'General Superintendent of the operations for the suppression of Thuggee' in March. In 1836, 'River-Thugs' operating on the Ganges were discovered in Bihar , Orissa , and Bengal , whose methods of throwing their victims overboard meant that there was very little circumstantial evidence with which to convict them.

Sleeman used this to argue that new regulation was required to enable convictions and the groundbreaking Act XXX of 1836 was passed, which made simply belonging to a thuggee gang punishable by life imprisonment with hard labour. The term 'Thug' was not defined and it thereafter became a legal umbrella-term for a range of crimes such as poisoning ( datura -thugs), while the original thuggee gangs that could be traced back to Sindouse had practically ceased to exist by this point. Dacoity was added to Sleeman's responsibilities in 1838 as thuggee activity had been effectively suppressed and, in 1839, he coined the term Megpunnaism to refer to the murder of impoverished parents to attain their children for sale, portraying it as a new form of thuggee. Following the failure of efforts by the Thuggee and Dacoity Department to apply anti-thuggee legislation to itinerant communities of Thoris and Jogis , Sleeman declared in 1839 that thuggee had been effectively destroyed as an organisation, marking the end of the campaign. Some 4,224 people were convicted of being Thugs between 1826 and 1847. Between c. 1826 and 1841, thuggee trials had a conviction rate of 98.9%.

Aftermath and legacy

The Anti-Thuggee Campaign of the 1830s provided a model for the later shift to a centralised police bureaucracy and established an all-India framework for policing and surveillance. The campaign also marked one of the first times that the study of criminality was recognised and co-opted into colonial rule. In 1839, Philip Meadows Taylor published the novel Confessions of a Thug , which derived much of its material from Sleeman's writings and popularised the Thugs. Thuggee thereafter became a Victorian sensation, with Queen Victoria herself requesting the pre-publication proofs of Taylor's book, witnessing the birth of a literary tradition. Among those to write about thuggee were Eugène Sue in his 1844 book Le Juif errant and Mark Twain in his 1897 book Following the Equator . Thuggee became one of the most potent images of colonial lore and fiction, and historians in the colonial tradition have cited the thuggee campaign in particular to redeem the record of Company rule.

In the 1840s, the Thuggee and Dacoity Department shifted its focus to communities of "hereditary dacoits", with Act XXIV of 1843 extending the provisions of the 1836 Thuggee Act to include "professional Dacoits". From the 1860s, the department's operations were restricted to policing cross-border crime and it was abolished as a special agency operating on British territory . The later policing campaigns it pursued criminalised communities connected to the practice of raiding and protection, which had served as a form of indigenous police. The archives of the Thuggee and Dacoity Department were repeatedly cited to evidence the existence of 'criminal tribes' and the department was a key player in the presentation of a crime plague perpetrated by itinerant and semi-nomadic communities . This culminated in the 1871 Criminal Tribes Act (CTA), with the department tasked with controlling its implementation for a time. The Thuggee and Dacoity Department was replaced in 1904 with the Department of Criminal Intelligence . As late as the 1940s, the Intelligence Bureau in Shimla was referred to by rickshaw wallahs as the ' Thagi Daftar ' ('Thuggee Office'). The CTA was repealed in 1949 and the tribes were officially " denotified " in 1952 with the introduction of the Habitual Offenders Act .

Historical evaluations

Sources and historicity

The vast majority of primary sources that exist on thuggee were written by Sleeman and his colleagues, including published texts as well as manuscripts in the East India Company archives, meaning that historians have very few alternative accounts with which to confirm, balance, or invalidate the colonial sources. Beginning in the 1950s, the colonial-era representation of thuggee as a pan-Indian fraternity of ritual stranglers has come under sustained and diverse scholarly criticism. There is a general consensus among scholars that this representation, derived from Sleeman's interviews with approvers, was distorted by the prejudices and misinterpretations of the time. Historians such as Hiralal Gupta, Stewart N. Gordon , Christopher Bayly , Martine van Woerkens, Radhika Singha, Kim A. Wagner , and Mike Dash have sought to engage with the sources to revise Sleeman's colonial-era representation, mostly presenting the thugs as more or less ordinary criminals, or thuggee as a type of banditry . While the historian Tom Lloyd doesn't reject this approach, he criticises the assumption that the sources present a truth waiting to be uncovered and asserts the view that they can only be used to study how thuggee was represented.

Literary scholar Amal Chatterjee describes the colonial representation of thuggee as "a fiction that served all the interests of British power in India", wherein it provided conclusive proof of the moral superiority of the 'advanced' European over the 'primitive' Indian and was presented as a triumph of Christian faith over Indian tradition . Sanjay Subrahmanyam notes that Company rule in India had been under attack at home by figures such as Adam Smith and Edmund Burke and places thuggee within the context of the Company's response that saw it build up its moral superiority and entitlement to rule. Van Woerkens points to how thuggee allowed the British to reformulate their relations with native states . Wagner describes the events of the 1830s as a moral panic and asserts that thuggee became entangled in the need to legitimise the expansion of the colonial state. Historian Parama Roy asserts that the colonial discourse on thuggee was highly self-referential, discrepancies between approver accounts were smoothed over, and approvers were driven to authenticate the official knowledge of thuggee.

Wagner argues that, though the colonial representation cannot be taken at face value, it was not invented from nothing, and historians can clearly identify and evaluate the biases that permeate the texts due to them also including the questions asked by the British officials. Alexander Lyon Macfie concludes that, though the so-called 'thuggee archive' should be seen in part as an Orientalist construction, it is broadly accurate in its presentation of most of the facts. To evidence that the sources point to some sort of social reality, Wagner and Dash cite consistencies across the first reports of thuggee that they judge to have been made without knowledge of the others. Van Woerkens holds the thugs' recorded argot of Ramasee to place them in a "concrete reality". Dash further points to British efforts to keep their approvers isolated from one another and the bodies that were exhumed. Wagner cites the volume of information collected by British officials that had no bearing on legal procedures as evidence that thuggee was not simply a colonial project for legitimacy or control over their Indian subjects.

Historical revisionism

Historians generally accept that thuggee—loosely defined as the activities of various social classes and communities upon which the term was imposed—was probably related to East India Company policy from the late 18th century up to the 1830s. Most scholars view thuggee in the context of political chaos and socioeconomic disruption amidst the decline of the Mughal Empire , exacerbated by the expansion of British rule. Following a theory first posited by Gupta in 1959, Wagner, Singha, and Dash view the thugs as being composed of soldiers out of work due to a contraction in the military labour market caused by the expansion of British rule and subsidiary alliances that entailed the disbandment of native standing armies in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Wagner posits that the disbanded soldiers, who were often paid with loot, merely continued their predatory lifestyle while Singha surmises that highway robbery was probably practised by mercenary bands moving between employers and may have become permanent as the market contracted.

Wagner concludes in favour of Halhed's view on the nature of the thugs, stating that they were "no more than a species of robber... best understood in the context of banditry rather than some vague notion of a religious sect or caste -like entity". He judges that thuggee could be distinguished from other types of banditry based on the combination of secrecy, deception, and the murder of the victims. Wagner concludes that thuggee was a longstanding phenomenon predating British colonial rule and that there was not a single representative thug archetype . He also describes Sleeman as an "eminent self-publicist" whose campaign owed more to the early anti-thuggee operations from 1809 to 1812 than to his own initiative or genius.

Dash judges the distinguishing feature of thugs to be that they invariably murdered their victims before robbing them. He places the number of individuals deriving a living of some sort from thuggee at as many as three thousand, further describing thuggee techniques as "a system of murder without parallel". Dash surmises that thuggee likely reached its peak in the 1820s following the break-up of the Pindari bands and the disbandment of the Maratha armies . He further links this to economic hardship caused by recurring famines and harsh rents levied by the Company to recover expenses incurred during the Pindari and Maratha wars . He suggests that the famines of the late 18th century , despite being more destructive than the depression of the 1820s, likely forced fewer people into banditry due to an abundance of opportunities in military employment. Dash states that thuggee could not be considered ' organised crime ' in the modern sense of the term as the thugs lacked a central organisation or complex hierarchy. He also notes that, though the thuggee trials were deficient by today's standards, especially regarding the right to counsel , thousands of men at the time were convicted of murder in India, Europe, and the United States on far less evidence.

Van Woerkens, who authored the first scholarly monograph on thuggee in 2002, conversely theorises that the thugs had once been authentic worshippers of Kali but that their religious construction had broken down over time and their community identity had disintegrated due to geographical dispersion. Van Woerkens suggests that the thugs may have been made up of Banjaras , Pindaris, and Nagas whose livelihoods were disrupted by the British conquest. She bases her interpretation upon investigating the etymologies within Ramasee and analysing the various discourses surrounding thuggee. While van Woerkens's book has been described as well-researched and her account of the development of the colonial representation has been commended, her work has received criticism from scholars that view it as being "old-fashioned and inconsistent".

Gordon viewed the thugs as marauders that provided revenues to landholders, while Bayly and Singha saw them as bandits without a definitive modus operandi . Bayly posited that the initial reaction of the British authorities to thuggee arose out of an 'information panic' whereby the nascent colonial administration feared their lack of knowledge about the local population and that the locals were conspiring to deny it information. Van Woerkens describes the colonial-era portrayal of thuggee as a projection of British fear and anxiety arising from the prospect of ruling over a people they knew little about. According to Wagner, some officials "clearly" exploited the Government's concern over thuggee to assume more authority, with Sleeman's opportunism merely part of a wider trend that he refined.

Culture and beliefs

Methods

Thuggee gangs embarked on seasonal expeditions for months at a time, typically leaving in Kartika after the autumn harvest and returning around Asharh at the start of the monsoon season . Among the main victims of thuggee were sepoys , soldiers of native rulers, merchants, and Hindu and Muslim pilgrims. There were reputedly no European victims of thuggee. The thugs would commonly ingratiate themselves among parties of travellers based on mutual protection, adopting a range of disguises as soldiers in search of work, merchants, mendicants , wealthy people, Brahmins , sepoys, pundits , or travellers. Thugs preferred wealthy victims and used scouts to gather information on travellers and whether the roads were clear.

Thuggee conventionally involved strangling a victim using a handkerchief with a knot tied at the end as a sort of handle, while another held the victim's hands. Thugs sometimes strangled their victims in the night or woke them up, pretending that it was almost dawn, and took them to a secluded spot along the road. They sometimes administered datura seeds to their victims to incapacitate them before killing them. Thugs would quite often also murder their victims with swords, knives, or poison, whereafter their bodies would be thrown into a well or a nullah , or buried in a hole dug with pickaxes. The popular conception of thugs cemented in the latter half of the 19th century saw them as being devoted to murdering solely by strangulation, without shedding blood. Dash notes that thugs had no objection to shedding blood after their victims were dead and links the method of strangulation to the Hanafi school of jurisprudence favoured in Mughal India that held that murder could only merit capital punishment if it was done with a weapon, usually associated with the shedding of blood. Convicted stranglers were instead flogged, imprisoned, and made to pay blood money to their victim's family.

There were no eyewitnesses since every member of the party was murdered and little circumstantial evidence as the act was done by stealth, while items such as a rumāl , scarf, dhoti , wrap, cord, or even a knife and sword were likely to be found on innocent travellers. It was also a recorded practice among thugs to stab their victims in the face or belly to prevent them from being recognised or to ensure they were dead. Wagner describes thuggee as "very close to being the 'perfect crime'", noting that its inexpensive nature made it accessible to a wide range of people. The 1836 Thuggee Act was later used to prosecute child trafficking and robbers who non-lethally poisoned their victims. Amid controversy over the jurisdiction of the Thuggee and Dacoity Department, thuggee was defined in Act III of 1848 to include poisoning as a species of thuggee and 'child-stealing' .

Religious beliefs

Depositions of thugs conducted in the 1830s contain accounts of rituals and ceremonies that they partook in during their expeditions. In the interviews, Sleeman's colleague Captain James Paton specifically honed in on the thugs' religious orientations, asking loaded questions based on Christian thought . When conducting the interviews, Sleeman and Paton were predominantly interested in the goddess-worship of the thugs, their observance of rules and omens , and the variance between different gangs' customs. Wagner holds their "extreme interest" in matters of religion to "very likely" have influenced how the approvers discussed their own identities . The significance of religion to thuggee has differed between revisionist historians and those of the colonial tradition, epitomised by Jorge Luis Borges in 1923 when, after reading Confessions of a Thug , he posed the question: "Were the Thugs brigands who sanctified their profession with the cult of the goddess [ Bhavani ], or was it the cult of the Goddess [Bhavani] that turned them into brigands?"

Thugs worshipped different manifestations of Devi , of which Bhavani was most often referred to, in what composed a variety of traditions. The approvers themselves do not mention Kali in the sources, with the only mentions being Sleeman's own comments. According to Wagner and van Woerkens, they believed their actions to be sanctioned by the Goddess. Though the British were fascinated by the fact that Muslims worshipped Hindu deities , religious syncretism in India was common. According to Cynthia Ann Humes , Thug testimony only rarely referred to Bhavani, mostly in response to Sleeman's leading questions, and the Islamic concept of fate was invoked most often. Some Muslim approvers disowned Bhavani upon turning King's evidence , having identified her with Fatima or as an instrument of Allah , and therein maintained their belief in monotheism. In interviews with Paton, Muslim approvers described Bhavani as "only for thuggee", with another characterising her as "the chief of that trade". Sleeman estimated that about a third of Thugs were Muslims.

The thugs also held a myth of divine origins based on a story from the Devi Mahatmya in which Kali fought with the demon Raktabīja , aided by a group of goddesses called Matrikas — in the thugs' version, they took the place of the Matrikas and the final demons were defeated with strangulation. Sleeman claimed that the myth held "Kalee Davey" to have created the progenitors of thugs. Thugs ate consecrated goor in honour of Devi and made offerings to her before their expeditions. They strongly adhered to omens, with a bad omen such as an owl chirping at the wrong time being enough to abort a murder. According to Thug testimony from the early 1830s, thuggee gangs sometimes visited Vindhyachal Temple to make offerings. However, Feringheea , Sleeman's favourite approver, clearly disputed that thugs had a special relationship with the temples and priests of Devi in a conversation that was published in Sleeman's definitive 1836 book Ramaseeana .

Dr. Richard C. Sherwood, who authored the first scholarly work on thuggee out of the Madras Presidency in 1816, was the first to mention religion in connection with the phenomenon. Sherwood described the phansigars as highly superstitious, who, though some of them were Muslim, held "Cali or Mariatta" as their tutelary deity . In making an argument for the inadequacy of regulation in 1818, Perry's assistant made the earliest known reference in northern India to thuggee having a religious element, whereby he claimed that they "worshipped and sacrificed a kid to obtain the auspicious protection of their deity". By the early 1830s, the religious elements of thuggee had been sensationalised by Sleeman and brought to the fore.

According to Wagner and Singha, the religious beliefs and practices of those who practised thuggee were common in the wider population. Wagner states that "robbers, who did not worship a tutelary deity, perform pujas or entertain certain beliefs concerning the moral sanction of their acts would have been truly exceptional in an Indian context ". Singha asserts that the examining officers of the Thuggee Department were "in fact becoming acquainted with popular religion and culture but refracted through the prism of criminality". Dash similarly surmises that the motives behind thuggee weren't religious in nature, concluding that the thugs' beliefs were closer to folklore than a distinct faith. Wagner notes that ordinary dacoits , who were never assumed to have religious motivations, also made offerings and held a puja before and after robberies. Drawing a parallel to Carlo Ginzburg's study of the benandanti in early modern Italy , Wagner argues that the attention Sleeman and Paton gave to religion served to distort a phenomenon of highway robbers. He surmises that the incentive for thuggee most likely had nothing to do with religion and that the British were drawn to the ritual and religious meaning that the thugs ascribed to their acts in pursuit of legitimacy and moral or social status.

In contrast to this and based on interviews in which Thugs were asked how it was that they were about to be hanged if they were divinely protected , van Woerkens concludes that the thugs had once been true shaktas but that their internal belief system had collapsed due to an "unbounded lust for loot". She theorises that this caused the thugs' quest for salvation to devolve from ritually controlled violent actions to mass crimes for which the goods they stole no longer constituted divine payments in return for the sacrificial victims. Wagner holds van Woerkens to have deconstructed the colonial representation of thuggee only to use Sleeman's account to resurrect it.

Place in society and customs

Thugs were retained by local zamindars and rajas in return for a portion of the loot or as mercenaries, which was part of a broader institutionalised phenomenon that also saw kazaks , dacoits, and other marauders retained by landholders. According to the daroga of Sindouse in 1810, the locals supported themselves by cultivating the land for eight months of the year and for the remainder by horse trading or committing thuggee. A patwari from Parihara stated in 1812 that the thugs had been living in the area for generations and never cultivated the land, but brought back valuables from their expeditions. He also stated that the local zamindars took care of their families while they were gone and earned interest on loans given to the thugs. The thugs were also commonly and interchangeably referred to by themselves and fellow villagers as sepoys (meaning 'soldier' or ' retainer ') and borrowed military terminology in their use of jemadar to mean gang leader and subedar for when several bands joined together. Rather than composing a "counter-society... fully excluded from the 'law-abiding' sedentary society ", Wagner asserts that links between thuggee gangs and various communities evidence a loose-knit "itinerant underworld" of overlapping criminal networks.

Thugs commonly spared the children of their victims, and a large number of them were consequently adopted. Girls were married off to the sons or relatives of their adoptee, thus avoiding the costs of a dowry , while boys tended to go to childless parents in the context of high infant mortality rates. Thugs didn't always spare children, and, according to Wagner, only well-off thugs with a secure home base tended to adopt them. Interviews with long-term thugs, such as Buhram , evidence that they saw themselves as being above common thieves. Wagner states that the thugs perceived themselves, and wanted to be perceived, as "warrior- gentlemen " with a code of honour resembling that of the order of Kshatriya , inspired by the martial ethos of the local Rajput landowners. Thugs' customs or superstitions forbade them from murdering women or members of certain lower castes, though according to Dash this was not scrupulously observed.

The thugs used a criminal argot called Ramasee , which was compiled by Sleeman from interviews with more than a dozen Thugs in his 1836 seminal work on thuggee Ramaseeana . Sleeman perceived the "peculiar language" as being the key to uncovering thuggee and collected the vocabulary with a focus on establishing the thugs as rigidly governed by fixed rituals, rules, and omens. Sherwood had also published in 1816 a list of 57 "slang terms and phrases" from phansigars imprisoned in Madras, 20 of which also appeared in Sleeman's vocabulary derived from Thugs in northern and central India.

Thugs used the argot to communicate in front of their victims, to identify other thugs, and to define identity and status. The argot involved giving secondary meanings to established words and phrases so as not to arouse suspicion, such as using Tumbakoolao ('bring tobacco') to give the signal for the murders to take place. Similar argots were used by many different groups in 19th-century India as the lingua franca of the itinerant underworld and trading communities, with Wagner surmising that Ramasee wasn't exclusive to thugs. Wagner disputes that Ramasee could be thought of as a language, or even as a fixed argot, and asserts that it was also employed by traders, jugglers, and peddlers .

Hereditary nature

During the 1830s, British officials propagated an image of Thugs as hereditary, cult -oriented criminals. This representation, reinforced by detailed recording of their beliefs, slang, and superstitions, helped justify special legal procedures. Thuggee was also portrayed as an all-India conspiracy. Though Sherwood described the phanisigars as "hereditary murderers and plunderers", he posited that their lack of compassion and ruthlessness was due to their never having known an alternative rather than an inherent evil. According to an 1834 report by the Thugee Department officer in Rajputana Donald Friell McLeod , the thugs believed that they all originated from a group 15 generations prior that settled around Delhi under the protection of the Mughal emperor. At this point, according to the legend, they didn't commit any crimes but were forced to flee after murdering one of their associates, giving rise to seven nomadic Muslim clans. Starting from the 1797 tax list, Sleeman made detailed genealogies of thugs that he published in Ramaseeana , though they tended not to stretch further back than three generations and included the names of adopted children. The colonial-era portrayal saw thuggee as an ancient practice, with Sleeman arguing that the Sagartii of the 5th century BCE were ancestors of the stranglers described by Thévenot.

According to Wagner and Dash, alongside "hereditary thugs" that followed a family tradition and were rooted in their village, there were also "occasional thugs" that fell in and out of the practice. Wagner asserts that thuggee was not a uniform phenomenon and that neither were the individuals who practised it, further stating that the extant sources do not allow for discussion about the existence of thuggee prior to the 17th century. Singha and Lloyd similarly emphasise the diversity of individuals arrested for thuggee, with Singha noting that Thugs' alternative occupations were often dismissed by the colonial authorities as disguises. Singha considers the vast amount of material generated by the Thuggee and Dacoity Department on the hereditary nature of Thugs and Dacoits to, in reality, disguise the failure of the colonial regime to set up mechanisms of policing and prosecution capable of tying the specific offense to the individual offender.

Notable groups

British officials recorded extensive lists of subgroupings, and the colonial-era material on thuggee alludes to some 40 different 'classes' of Thugs. Notable groups include:

- Sindouse Thugs: based around the town of Sindouse (modern day Sindaus, Uttar Pradesh ), which as of 1812 was on the British-Maratha border. Feringheea heralded from the area. After the 1812 expedition, the Sindouse thugs resettled in Maratha territory. Laljee, the head zamindar of Sindouse who had protected the gangs and given them financial advances, was arrested in December 1812 amid a Rs 5,000 reward for his capture and sentenced to life in prison with hard labour.

- Telingana Thugs: from the Telangana region in the northern Deccan . Other groups of thugs from the area reportedly refused to mix with them on the basis that they were descended from cattle herders and itinerant tradesmen, and thus of a lower caste .

- Moltanee (Multaneea) Thugs: deriving their name from the city of Multan . They supposedly strangled their victims with the leather thongs they used to drive their oxen , suggesting that their main occupation was cattle herding and transportation.

- Soosea Thugs: recorded as being based in Rajastan and Malwa , operating in Gujarat , Khandesh and in Rajasthan . The biggest thuggee haul has been attributed to a Soosea gang from Rajputana , amounting to Rs 200,000 seized in Khandesh in the early 19th century.

- River Thugs: operated on the Ganges in Bihar , Bengal , and Orissa . Numbering approximately 300, they tricked passengers onto their boats and strangled them, whereafter they would throw the bodies overboard. Discovered by the British authorities in 1836, they were largely suppressed by 1840.

- Megpunna Thugs: a loose association of thieves discovered in the vicinity of Delhi that included itinerant groups such as the Banjara and Naik , but otherwise shared a similar modus operandi , argot, and religious beliefs to common thugs. They murdered parents to sell their children, typically strangling them with reins , and were officially classified as Thugs in 1839. According to Dash, they originated in 1826 and never numbered more than 200 men and women, being mostly restricted to Delhi and Rajputana.

- Tashma-baz Thugs: thimble-riggers found on the outskirts of Cawnpore in 1848 that were legally classified as Thugs due to their having murdered and robbed a few travellers that they had met on the roads.

Approvers

Thugs were motivated to become approvers to avoid the death penalty, whereby they confessed to specific crimes and, after they were conditionally pardoned, provided depositions . Over 100 Thugs were accepted as approvers by Sleeman and his colleagues and approver testimony and interviews served as the British authorities' main source of information on the phenomenon. Wagner notes that, for the initial confession to be believed and accepted, the thugs had to comply with any preconceived notions that the interrogator had about the case in question.

Feringheea was returned to jail in 1832, though other approvers remained on the roads with their nujeeb escorts (mounted militiamen ), hunting thuggee gangs they had personal knowledge of. They were temporarily freer as long as they remained useful and Dash suggests that at least a few of them might have levelled false accusations against innocent men to prolong this arrangement, as was suspected at the time.

Jubbulpore School of Industry

By the late 1830s, 56 approvers had been returned to Jubbulpore Central Jail, where they were kept in a lockup outside the prison gates away from the other inmates. Though the authorities believed that the approvers couldn't be reformed, the Jubbulpore School of Industry was established in 1837 as a manufactory where they and their families learnt trades. The approvers were employed in the manufactory compound and otherwise confined to a jail, separate from their families who were held under strict surveillance in a small walled village adjacent to the manufactory. They were generally only allowed to meet their families at mealtimes and were given allowances in return for their work that, after deducting food and clothing, went to their families. Sons of the approvers were often employed with their fathers, while women assisted in spinning textiles. The School of Industry's first products were bricks, and it was able to become self-sustaining, selling into the Central Provinces markets where the cost of importing from elsewhere was prohibitive.

They were later taught to make tents and carpets, and by 1847 produced 130 tents and 3,300 yards of Kidderminster carpet yearly. A carpet made by the Thugs was exhibited at the Great Exhibition in 1851 and they later made a 40 by 80 feet (12 m × 24 m) carpet for Queen Victoria that, as of 2005, remained on display in the Waterloo Chamber at Windsor Castle . Items made by the Thugs were also exhibited at the 1862 International Exhibition in London and the 1867 Exposition Universelle in Paris .

As of 1870, the institution housed 158 Thugs (mostly arrested in the 1840s and 1850s), 202 Dacoits, and over 1,500 wives and children. The productivity of the School declined heavily as the Thugs aged and by 1888 it was no longer making a profit. According to Sleeman, who visited the School three times between 1843 and 1848, the Thugs were initially keen to talk with visitors about their prior careers, but, following his last visit, he claimed that they had become ashamed of their past lives. By the start of the 20th century, the School of Industry had effectively ceased to exist and became a reformatory school for juvenile offenders .

In popular culture

By the 1860s and 1870s, thuggee had become a fixture of Indian colonial lore and it inspired one of the most potent and longest lasting Orientalist tropes in literature and film. Kim A. Wagner places this within the broader context of exotic fascinations with the Assassins , African leopard men , witch doctors , and cannibals . The Thugs have tended to be portrayed in fiction as a sinister oriental sect, led by a fanatical leader and seeking to expel the British from India. By the latter half of the 19th century, writers such as Philip Meadows Taylor and Eugène Sue had cemented the popular image of Thugs as a religiously motivated cult , devoted to strangling their victims as a form of human sacrifice . The later representations of this stereotype in film ensured its popularity well into the postcolonial era.

By the 1860s, the word 'thug' had made its way into everyday use in the English language , and today merely refers to a violent person.

Literature

The 1826 novel Pandurang Hari, or Memoirs of a Hindoo by William Browne Hockley possibly constitutes the first depiction of thuggee in an English novel. In it, the " T,hugs [ sic ]" are portrayed as cunning bandits and spare the lives of the protagonist and his companions. Philip Meadows Taylor's 1839 novel Confessions of a Thug was largely based on Sleeman 's writings and presents itself as a discovered manuscript on the confessions of Ameer Ali, a "real-life" thug-turned-approver. Ameer Ali recounts how he was kidnapped at a young age and initiated into the cult, also detailing thuggee customs and religious practices. The historical Sayyid Ameer Ali gave a deposition before Sleeman at Saugor in 1832, which, according to Wagner, only bears a "very slight resemblance" to Taylor's account. Based very loosely on several historical thugs, Taylor's work dramatised Sleeman's interviews and humanised his protagonist.

The 1844–1845 serial novel Le Juif errant ( The Wandering Jew ) by Eugène Sue features a fictionalised version of Feringheea as chief of the Thugs, who are presented as products of the tyranny of Indian society and the exploitation of colonisers. The 1857–1858 novel Nena Sahib, oder: Die Empörung in Indien ( Nana Sahib, or: The Uprising in India ) by Hermann Goedsche sees Nana Saheb ally with the Thugs as a reaction to British greed and tyranny. In Francisco Luís Gomes 's 1866 novel Os Brâmanes ( The Brahmans ), the Brahmin antagonist becomes a Thug and later a mutineer. The 1877 novel Le Procès des Thugs ( The Trial of Thugs ) by René de Pont-Jest [fr] centres around a spectacular trial of thuggee chief Feringheea, with the Thugs later allying with the Fenians against their British oppressors.

In his 1880 novel La maison à vapeur ( The Steam House ), Jules Verne depicts Nana Saheb as being found in Bundelkhand among Thugs, Dacoits, and Pindaris . The 1886 novel Kalee's Shrine by Grant Allen and May Cotes sees the Anglo-Indian protagonist initiated into thuggee as a girl whereafter she is sent to England, possessed by Kali. In Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's 1887 short story "Uncle Jeremy's Household", Miss Warrender, the Anglo-Indian governess , is discovered to be a thuggee princess, orphaned after her father was killed during the 1857 uprising. Bram Stoker 's 1890 short story " Gibbet Hill " centres on thuggee-like children attacking a traveller in England.

The second and fourth novels in Emilio Salgari 's Sandokan series feature Thugs as the antagonists. I misteri della jungla nera ( The Mystery of the Black Jungle ; 1895) sees the protagonist, a Bengali hunter, battle the Thugs to rescue a love interest, while Le due tigri ( The Two Tigers ; 1904) is set against the backdrop of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and sees Sandokan rescue his daughter from the Thugs, who have joined forces with the mutineers to fight the British colonisers. The 1952 John Masters novel The Deceivers sees a British officer go undercover in a thuggee cult and participate in acts of thuggee. It was later adapted into a 1988 film . In the 2014 historical fiction novel The Strangler Vine by Miranda Carter , the protagonists encounter Sleeman's system for reclaiming suspected Thugs at Jubbulpore before becoming suspicious of his treatment of the native population.

Film

The 1939 film Gunga Din marks the first portrayal of thuggee in film and sees three British soldiers and a waterbearer (Gunga Din) come into conflict with a resurgent sect of Thuggee cultists. The film is partly based on Rudyard Kipling 's poem of the same name , as well as Soldiers Three , and ends with Kipling penning the first words of the poem after being saved by the three protagonists. The Thugs are presented as literal soldiers of the Goddess, fighting against the colonial order and confronting their enemies on the battlefield. In the 1959 film The Stranglers of Bombay , an officer of the East India Company investigates missing caravans and discovers and defeats a thuggee sect. The Thugs are depicted as being in conspiracy with a village leader. The film ends with a quote attributed to Sleeman: "If we have done nothing else for India, we have done this good thing."

The 1963 Mario Camerini films Kali Yug: Goddess of Vengeance and The Mystery of the Indian Temple feature Klaus Kinski as the leader of a thuggee cult. In the 1965 film Help! , The Beatles encounter a "Kahili"-worshipping ancient Indian cult, parodying prior portrayals of thuggee. Based on a short story by Mahasweta Devi , the 1968 Hindi film Sunghursh depicts a thuggee family and sees a Kali devotee attempt to pass his mantle on to his grandson, the protagonist.

The 1984 Steven Spielberg film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , drawing inspiration from Gunga Din , features a fanatical thuggee cult based in a subterranean temple and led by the Kali priest Mola Ram . In the film, the 'Thuggees' [ sic ] have stolen a lingam and use kidnapped children for slave labour in their mines, aiming to "massacre the British imperialists, crush the Muslims, and then cause the god of the Christians to crumble into dust". The 2018 Hindi film Thugs of Hindostan centres around a band of Thugs that resist Company rule. The Thugs are portrayed as bandits that pounce upon their victims and are not presented as worshippers of Kali.

Gallery

--- INFOBOX ---

Thuggee
Duration: Possibly 17th or 18th centuries – 1840s
Location: Indian subcontinent , mainly central India
Cause: Socioeconomic factors, the decline of the Mughal Empire and expansion of British rule
Motive: Robbery, alleged human sacrifice
Target: Travellers
Deaths: Hundreds exhumed , Estimated 50, 000–100, 000 total
Convictions: 1, 368 (1826–1835) , 4, 224 (1826–1847)