Lawrence Bishnoi (born; 12 February 1993) is an Indian gangster who attained notoriety as the kingpin of the " Bishnoi Gang ".

The Bishnoi Gang is listed as a terrorist entity by Canada due to its alleged involvement in a wave of extortions and shootings targeting the South Asian diaspora in the United States and Canada. Bishnoi has denied all allegations.

Early life and education

Lawrence Bishnoi was born on 12 February 1993 into Bishnoi family in the village of Dutarawali in the Fazilka district , India . Due to his fair complexion, he was named after Sir Henry Lawrence . His father, a former constable in the Haryana Police , left the force in 1997 and took up farming. During his school days, Bishnoi used to indulge in luxurious watches and shoes. He also used to financially assist children who were in need of money in his native village. Bishnoi completed his early education in Abohar , Punjab, before moving to Chandigarh in 2010 to attend DAV College .

In 2011, while studying at Panjab University , Bishnoi became actively involved in student politics, joining the Punjab University Campus Students Council . During this time, he formed a close association with Goldy Brar , who would later become a notorious gangster. The two became increasingly involved in university politics, allegedly leading to criminal activities. Bishnoi went on to complete his LLB from Panjab University.

Criminal life

Bishnoi's criminal career began in Chandigarh between 2010 and 2012, where several First Information Reports (FIRs) were registered against him for attempted murder, trespassing, assault, and robbery. These cases were tied to his involvement in student politics. Out of seven FIRs filed against him in Chandigarh, Bishnoi was acquitted in four, while three cases remain pending.

Rise in crime and gang formation

While in jail, Bishnoi forged alliances with other prisoners, contributing to his gang's growth. After his release, he formed connections with arms dealers and expanded his criminal operations, particularly during his time at Punjab University. After graduating in 2013, Bishnoi allegedly escalated his violent activities by murdering a winning candidate in the Government College student elections in Muktsar , and a rival candidate in the Ludhiana Municipal Corporation elections . He also became involved in liquor dealing, and began sheltering murderers in his gang. In 2014, he had an armed confrontation with the Rajasthan Police , resulting in his imprisonment.

Association with Rocky and Bharatpur Jail

Bishnoi built a relationship with Jaswinder Singh, also known as "Rocky," a gangster-turned-politician. Rocky was assassinated in 2016 by Jaipal Bhullar, who was later killed in 2020.

In 2021, Bishnoi was transferred to Tihar Jail in Delhi under charges related to the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) . Authorities reported that Bishnoi was using Voice over IP (VoIP) calls to communicate with his associates. In August 2023, the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad received custody of Bishnoi, citing a case of drug smuggling, and he was transferred to a high-security ward in the Sabarmati Central Jail .

Involvement in high-profile cases

Salman Khan threat

In 2018, Bishnoi's associate Sampath Nehra attempted an attack on Salman Khan , linked to the 1998 blackbuck poaching case , as the Bishnoi consider the Blackbuck sacred. Bishnoi later issued direct threats against Khan, stating that Khan would be killed in Jodhpur .

In November 2023, Bishnoi claimed responsibility for a shooting at actor-singer Gippy Grewal 's home due to his alleged association with Salman Khan. Grewal denied any friendship with Khan.

Assassination of Sidhu Moose Wala

On 29 May 2022, Punjabi singer Sidhu Moose Wala was assassinated in Mansa, Punjab . Bishnoi's associate Goldy Brar claimed responsibility for orchestrating the murder in coordination with Bishnoi. At the time, Bishnoi was in custody in Tihar Jail, but police linked his gang to the shooting.

Following the assassination, Bishnoi filed a plea in the Delhi High Court requesting protection from a possible fake encounter by the Punjab Police . He later withdrew his petitions from both the Delhi High Court and the Punjab and Haryana High Court .

Alleged connections with the pro-Khalistan movement

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) filed a chargesheet in March 2022 against Bishnoi and 15 other individuals under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. The chargesheet outlines Bishnoi's syndicate's connections with the pro-Khalistan movement, aiming to acquire advanced weapons and use proceeds from their extortion activities to fund and expand their criminal operations. The NIA noted that Bishnoi is facing 84 criminal cases across multiple states, including Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, and Delhi. Canadian authorities, however, claim Bishnoi and his associates targeted Sikh separatists, linking the gang to the murder of Hardeep Singh Nijjar in 2023. Lawrence Bishnoi himself denies all involvement with the pro-Khalistan movement, and in 2023 stated he is a "patriot" and a "nationalist", deeply opposed to both Pakistan and the Khalistan movement, being a Hindu Indian. Furthermore, Bishnoi's associates murdered Sukhdool Singh Gill, a member of the pro-Khalistani Khalistan Tiger Force , considered a terrorist organization by India.

Assassination of Sukhdool Singh

On 21 September 2023, Bishnoi claimed responsibility for the killing of Sukhdool Singh Gill (also known as Sukha Duneke), a member of the Khalistan Tiger Force in Canada.

Assassination of Sukhdev Singh Gogamedi

On 5 December 2023, Karni Sena President Sukhdev Singh Gogamedi was shot dead in Jaipur . The Bishnoi gang claimed responsibility for the assassination through Rohit Godara, a known gang member.

Assassination of Baba Siddique

The Bishnoi Gang claimed responsibility for the 12 October 2024 assassination of Baba Siddique , a former Maharashtra Cabinet minister, citing his close relationship with Salman Khan. Mumbai Police attempted to obtain custody of Bishnoi but were rejected due to an order under Section 268 of the Code of Criminal Procedure .

Alleged criminal activities in the United States and Canada

In October 2024, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) alleged that criminal groups, including Bishnoi's gang, were being used by "agents of the Government of India" to target individuals linked to pro-Khalistani elements in Canada . The Washington Post reported that Indian National Security Adviser Ajit Doval met with Jody Thomas in Singapore , where Canadian officials presented evidence linking the Bishnoi gang to the killing of Hardeep Singh Nijjar , a pro-Khalistani leader. In response to the allegations about the Bishnoi gang, the Ministry of External Affairs of India has said that India asked Canada to extradite some of the members linked to the Bishnoi gang but Canada did not act on those requests and that India finds Canadian allegations "really strange".

In late September 2025, Canada added the Bishnoi Gang to its list of terrorist entities.

In late 2025 and early 2026, the RCMP linked the Bishnoi Gang to a wave of extortions and shootings targeting the South Asian diaspora in Metro Vancouver and Brampton, Ontario . The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) arrested a Bishnoi member in California. In April 2026, CBC investigative news program The Fifth Estate published a report alleging the Bishnoi Gang had infiltrated Cricket Canada and was involved in corruption within the organisation and match-fixing activities, including in the Canadian national cricket team 's matches at the 2026 Men's T20 World Cup .

Gang network and operations

The Bishnoi gang reportedly has over 800 members, across five Indian states and operates internationally. Despite being imprisoned, Bishnoi continues to control his syndicate through illegal communications with his associates.

Indian government links to gang

On January 13, 2026 the RCMP alleged that the Bishnoi gang "was acting on behalf of the Indian Government", claiming, “The Bishnoi Crime Group is a violent criminal organization with an active, continually expanding presence in several countries, including Canada.”

--- INFOBOX ---

Born: ( 1993-02-12 ) 12 February 1993 (age 33) , Fazilka district , Punjab , India
Alma mater: DAV College ( BA ) , Panjab University ( LLB )
Occupation: Gangster
Years active: 2010–present
Known for: Killing of Sidhu Moose Wala , Killing of Baba Siddique , Life threat to Salman Khan and many others
Height: 170 cm (5 ft 7 in)
Judicial status: Imprisoned
Criminal charge: Organised crime, drug trafficking, extortion, targeted killing
Country: India , Canada , United States
Weapon: Pistol , AK-47