The Maniac Latin Disciples (often abbreviated as MLD ) are a predominantly Hispanic, but multi-racial street gang based in Chicago, Illinois .

Identifiers

Maniac Latin Disciples display black and light blue colors. Identifiers include a heart with a devil's tail and horns, a hooded character called the Monk, swastika, and the trident. Another common identifier among Maniac Latin Disciples is use of a blackletter font D for the Disciples alliance, similar to that of the Detroit Tigers "D" logo.

History

The Maniac Latin Disciples originated as a Humboldt Park baseball club of Puerto Rican kids in the mid-1960s. They were harassed and jumped (physically assaulted) by white gangs such as the Simon City Royals , Almighty Gaylords and Harrison Gents. The club fought back to protect themselves and got respect on the street, earning them back-up from the Black Disciples . The Latin Scorpions merged with another Latino club ran by Ernesto “Capper” Flores and turned into a full-fledged gang in 1966, calling themselves the Latin Disciples. A scrappy junior high boy named Albert "Hitler" Hernandez would position himself as ‘King’ of the new adolescent gang on Hirsch & Rockwell. Around 1970 the first Latin Disciples went to prison for aggravated assault & battery. They had a meeting with the Black Gangster Disciples (today split into the Black Disciples and Gangster Disciples) and established a business relationship on the inside and outside.

Albert “King Hitler” Hernandez was killed at 18 years old in 1972 by two Latin Kings. He asked them to remove their gang colors while walking through Latin Disciple’s turf. This ended in a brawl with those two Latin Kings, and Hernandez being stabbed to death. From then on the Latin Disciples Nation went to war with the Latin Kings.

The Latin Disciples soon opened up shop on the infamous drug corner Rockwell & Potomac known as “The Twilight Zone”. The gang’s power increased on the northwest side with their domination of the illegal heroin trade. Latin Disciple sections spread throughout Humboldt Park at Thomas & Washtenaw “Murder Town”, Washtenaw & Hirsch, Maplewood & Wabansia, and Talman & Wabansia “Wild Side or “T-Dub”. In 1976 Division & Avers opened in West Humboldt Park and in ‘77 the Kedzie & Barry set opened in Logan Square and quickly branched out. This caused increased resentment among opposing Latin Kings and Insane Unknown Kings whose territory was getting encroached on. A year later, Chi-Chi D, the Latin Disciple President of KB, was gunned down by Insane Unknowns.

The Latin Disciples Nation joined the "Folks Alliance" of gangs in 1978, becoming enemies of all People Nations like the Black P Stones , PR Stones, Spanish Lords, Vice Lords and Latin Kings whom the MLD’s already hated. With the Latin Disciples joining Folks, the Spanish Cobras , Imperial Gangsters , and Latin Eagles immediately followed due to the United Latino Organization they had on the street.

After a major police drug bust took down many ULO sets, including the Latin Disciple leadership, Fernando "Fernie D” Zayas became Prince of the gang in 1979. He led the gang on the streets hard, but has been in Illinois Department of Corrections custody since 1983 for his organizing and participating in the drive-by murders of three Insane Unknowns. One of the Unknowns participated in Chi-Chi’s homicide. Prince Fernie-D ran the gang with a tight fist from inside prison for over a decade.

In 1983, the Latin Disciples officially became the Maniac Latin Disciples. During the 80’s, MLD sets opened in the Hermosa neighborhood on Keystone & Dickens “Omskiville”, Keystone & Cortland “Killa City”, Belden & Lowell and Kenneth & Belden. Albert "Chino D" Ojeda attempted to become a major drug dealer in the gang during this time. This sparked a violent battle with his gang affiliates, Chicago Police said. Chino D was shot and left a paraplegic. From his wheelchair he continued to run his drug operation. A friend who was killed in 1988 and his crew would chauffeur him around the Humboldt Park area in a van, the wheelchair wedged in the back.

In April 1992, the Kedzie & Barry Maniac Latin Disciples accused a Spanish Cobra named Orlando of selling them bad drugs. The angry MLD’s returned and shot the dealer to death. The Insane Spanish Cobras retaliated, causing a riot between sections of Cobras and D’s that led into a ferocious two-day war of guns blazing on Logan Square streets. After fighting together as brothers for two decades, the Maniac Latin Disciples and Insane Spanish Cobras began having friction around 1994 over drug territory. In February 1996 a Cobra shot an MLD nicknamed Hi-Lo, who barley survived the attack after a bullet went through his cheek. A high ranking Maniac leader named Johnny “Loco” Almodóvar swore revenge and organized a drastic retaliation. He ordered 3 synchronized drive-bys at 3 different Spanish Cobra sections. Some Cobras were wounded, but none were killed. Soon, Chicago Police arrest an MLD and flip him into a snitch who gives up the sign-in sheet from the meeting where the Cobra shootings were discussed and planned by Don Loco.

In the mid-1990s the MLD’s were one of the largest and most organized gangs in the city. But war with other Latino Folks and a couple money making street corners caused problems within the gang itself. A desire to control profitable drug corners caused a renegade faction of Maniac Latin Disciples called “The Bums” from Rockwell & Potomac to attack their own gang the Talman & Wabansia section. This conflict was made famous on the History Channel's tv show “Gangland”, describing the Maniac Latin Disciple civil war that resulted in the murder of their leader, Enrique “Prince Rick Dog” Garcia, who was sitting in his car when he was ambushed and shot to death by a renegade MLD. It was later found that the Bums heavily instigated the war with the Cobras and the Hi-Lo incident to weaken the section of MLD’s they wanted to take over. The Maniac Latin Disciple civil war ended by ‘98, but the internal damage was already done, and severe. Police raids in the early 2000’s decimated much the MLD leadership. Today the gang currently remains large on the Northwest Side, but never regained its previous power. Maniac Latin Disciples eventually spread to different states such as Wisconsin, Tennessee, Michigan, Ohio, and Texas. Subsets of the gang exist in cities such as Antioch, Tn; Nashville, Tn; Memphis, Tn; Milwaukee, WI; Dallas, Tx and Houston, Tx. At one point the gang was heavily involved with the prison Spanish Gangster Disciples unity of Latino Folks inside, which is different than the street gang SGDN, whose founding members were former Maniac Latin Disciples.

--- INFOBOX ---

Maniac Latin Disciples
Founded: 1966
Named after: Albert "Hitler" Hernandez
Founding location: Humboldt Park , Chicago, Illinois, United States
Years active: 1966–present
Territory: Chicago metropolitan area , Ohio , Quad Cities , Boston , Wisconsin , Michigan , Indiana , Tennessee , Texas , New York and Florida .
Ethnicity: Hispanic-American
Membership (est.): 7, 500-10, 000
Activities: Drug trafficking, assault, auto theft, robbery, homicide, money laundering, weapons trafficking
Allies: No Allies
Rivals: Latin Kings , Spanish Cobras , Latin Eagles , Four Corner Hustlers , Black P. Stones , Simon City Royals , Ambrose , Vice Lords , Gaylords , Almighty Saints , La Raza , Mickey Cobras