The Neo Black Movement of Africa is an international confraternity . It was established in 1977 at the University of Benin in Nigeria as part of the Pan-African movement .

History

On July 7, 1977, nine students from the University of Benin , led by Nicholas Idemudia started the Neo Black Movement of Africa (NBM), a male brotherhood focused on "intellectual radicalism in pursuit of Pan-African struggles." With the support of M. Angulu Onwuejiogwu, a professor of history and anthropology at the university, the founders of the NBM were:

- Marvel Akpoyibo
- Uche Alumona
- Tokunbo Brown
- Gbolahom Dosunmu
- Godwin Ehigiator
- Nicholas Idemudia
- Bernard Ojishua
- Olagungu Ojo
- John Okogie

The NBM formed as a response to the reported excesses of National Association of Seadogs (Pyrates), a similar group established in 1952. NBM became a prominent group at many universities in Nigeria during the 1980s. Its leaders then decided to connect with the Neo black movement of Africa, calling itself a brotherhood focusing on black realism and determinism.

The Neo-Black Movement of Africa was registered with the Corporate Affairs Commission under the Company and Allied Matters Act (CAMA) on February 24, 1994, with registration No 7729. As of 2024, it has around one million members. Its headquarters are in Amagba, Benin City , Edo State, Nigeria .

Symbols

The NBM's motto is "Social Justice and Equality/Equity for all." Its symbol is a black axe above two hands in chains, symbolically smashing the shackles of colonialism . This represents its readiness to confront difficult tasks and to break social injustice, along with other vices that limit humanity's progress.

Its colors are white, black, and yellow. Members wear white shirts, black pants, a yellow tie, and headgear consisting of a yellow ribbon. White represents harmony and purity of the body and mind, black represents sympathy with the Black race, and yellow represents struggle.

Activities

NBM's activities encourage African art, culture, and traditions, along with global peace. It holds a national convention annually in March. Members participate in "jollification", an event featuring Egede drums, music, and dancing . At the end of each year, the group hosts Black/African Nights that are open to non-members of all genders. Members participate in at least one charitable activity each year. Its priorities include climate change, education, food sovereignty, health, indigenous people, and water.

Controversies and member misconduct

In February 2024, the Neo Black Movement of Africa publicly disassociated itself from the Black Axe , a criminal subgroup of the confraternity that formed in 1994. In January 2024, NBM published a list of 24 expelled members who were associated with Black Axe, followed by a list of 27 expelled members in July 2024. The latter included four former NBM national presidents. However, various publications refer to NBM and Black Axe as synonymous, including the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada . In April 2024, reporter Biaca Bridger wrote, "Due to the secretive nature of the group it is difficult to ascertain the alleged links between the Neo-Black Movement and Black Axe. However, throughout Nigeria, the two groups are synonymous, with their members taking part in organized crime , human trafficking and money laundering ."

Chapters

NBM refers to its campus chapters as temples. As of 2013, its temples were at the following Nigerian colleges and universities, with active chapters indicated in bold and inactive chapters and institutions in italics .

--- INFOBOX ---

NBM
Founded: July 7, 1977 ; 48 years ago ( 1977-07-07 ) , University of Benin (Nigeria)
Type: Nigerian Confraternity
Affiliation: Independent
Status: Active
Emphasis: Pan-Africanism
Scope: International
Motto: "Social Justice and Equality/Equity for all"
Colors: White , Black , and Yellow
Symbol: Black Axe and chains
Members: 1, 000, 000 lifetime
Nickname: NBM of Africa
Headquarters: Amagba, Benin City , Edo State , Nigeria
Website: nbmofafrica .org