The following is a list of collective or corporate entities involved in organised crime in Belize , including street gangs , drug cartels , mafias , criminal enterprises and criminal syndicates . This list includes both known or suspected and active or defunct entities. Tongs , outlaw motorcycle clubs , as well as terrorist, militant and paramilitary groups are included only if involved in organised crime. Entities not based in Belize are included only if they are known to have or suspected of having members, chapters or operations in Belize.

Gangs

Bloods and Crips gangs were introduced to Belize by US deportees in the 1980s, and especially adopted by locals upon the 1988 release of Colors . A boom in violent and organised crime followed, not yet mitigated by the 2020s. As of 2019, there were at least three dozen gangs in Belize City , each loosely affiliated to Bloods or Crips, totalling some 900 to 1,400 members.

George Street

George Street are a Bloods-affiliated street gang in Southside Belize City, allegedly formed in the late 1980s by US deportee Heathcliff Reyes to oppose the concurrently formed Majestic Alley (Crips). They (with Majestic Alley) are thought to be the country's earliest gangs. They initially claimed all the Southside as their base of operations. Their alleged 1992 murder of Derek Itza Brown (Majestic Alley leader) is thought to have kicked off gang warfare in Belize.

The 2000s saw Reyes shot dead by police, the rise to prominence of the Tillett family in the gang, and a bitter rivalry with the neighbouring Taylor's Alley (Bloods) which bled into the 2010s. The late 2000s is thought to have been a boon to the gang, allegedly culminating in successful hits against leaders of rival gangs ( Southside , Brick City, Ghost Town ) in 2010. In 2011, they joined a government-mediated gang truce, which is thought to have come undone partially due to the 2012 killing of their then-leader, Sheldon Pinky Tillett, allegedly by Taylor's Alley.

In late 2018, their (with PIV 's, Back a Land 's, Southside's) gang territory was estimated as amongst the largest (of 36) in the country. Their numbers were estimated at 40 to 50, with a mean age of 32 (the only gang whose members' average age was in the 30s, rather than 20s or teens). In 2019, they were deemed "the most powerful [of 24 gangs]" given their membership ("up to 150 gang members") and organisation ("well developed internal informal hierarchies").

In 2021, they (with PIV, Southside, Gaza New Generation ) were considered amongst the largest gangs (of "over 40") in the country.

Majestic Alley

Majestic Alley are a Crips-affiliated street gang in Northside Belize City, allegedly formed in the late 1980s by US deportee Fredrick Diggy Dap Lynch to oppose the concurrently formed George Street (Bloods). They (with George Street) are thought to be the country's earliest gangs. They initially claimed all the Northside as their base of operations. Their alleged 1992 murder of Lyndon Tunan Arnold (George Street leader) is thought to have kicked off gang warfare in Belize.

Lynch is thought to have fled the country upon witnessing the 2007 murder of a close associate (Crips leader George Junie Balls McKenzie).

In late 2018, their gang territory was estimated as being on the smaller side (a few blocks). Their numbers were estimated at 25 to 50, with a mean age of 29.

Other entities

Guatemalan and Mexican groups use Belize to receive, store, and move illicit drugs and precursor chemicals. Furthermore, Belizean gangs seemingly provide logistical help in return for illicit drugs and arms.

--- INFOBOX ---

George Street
Founded: ca late 1980s
Founder: Heathcliff Reyes
Founding location: George Street, Belize City, Belize
Territory: c. 138 acres around George Street (2018)
Membership (est.): 40–50 (2018); up to 150 (2019)
Leaders: List Heathcliff Reyes , Lyndon Tunan Arnold , Sheldon Pinky Tillett , Gerald Shiny Tillett Sr
Rivals: List Majestic Alley , Taylor's Alley , Southside , Pregnant Alley , Brick City , Ghost Town